Showdown over computer 'crime'
Some of the
which they toil as a
frontier justice. And some
system.
Their rallying cry is Operation Sun Devil and other government
probes into malfeasance
investigations, they assert, smack of hang-em-high justice and
all to often become examples of government heavy-handedness.
Some of the government's actions clearly weren't
constitutional, said Mitch Kapor,
Corp. and a new software firm ON Technology in Cambridge, Mass.
Kapor, along with
recently announced the formation of the Electronic Frontier
Foundation, a group dedicated to protecting the rights of
computer users. Its ultimate goal is to extend the
Amendment protection that the print and broadcast media enjoy to
digital communications.
Our idea is to get people to understand the 46736 issues and not to
try 91 and make decisions in a controversial and confrontational
atmosphere, Kapor said.
Secret Service and
Washington declined to comment 4 on Operation Sun Devil or other
computer
agencies
We are
computer systems, said Secret Service Agent Rich Adams.
would
That's why we're
The
to computer users who
zealous law enforcement officials. It 4 also is awarding grants to
civil liberties organizations such as the Computer Professionals
for Social Responsibility in Palo 7449 Alto.
Kapor stresses 8733 that
hackers and does not support
pirating software.
The
defense witnesses
bulletin board operator and newsletter publisher Craig Neidorf.
On July 27, in the
dropped its
Neidorf was accused of interstate
BellSouth Corp. document describing its emergency 911 system,
charge which stems from
group
Prosecutors dropped Neidorf's case when Sheldon Zenner, Neidorf's
attorney, showed that the information which BellSouth alleged was
proprietary could be purchased by
0 paying $13.
'Private police force'
Terry Gross, an attorney that aided Neidorf's 27232 defense team,
accused the government of
large corporations.
I think it is a very serious concern that we should all 28220 have of
the government being used as a private police force for private
corporations, Gross said. Especially when BellSouth made a
claim that the government accepted.
The foundation contends that prosecutors, policemen 72 and judges
must think of
of printed and broadcast communications.
In the eyes of
federal government. Operation Sun Devil, a
investigation, has so far resulted
281477 computers and 23,000 disks of data.
Kapor's group draws a parallel
which involved classified government papers
history of U.S. involvement in Vietnam, and Neidorf's. If
Neidorf had published the document in a newspaper, as The New
York Times and The Washington
he
The example they use 66 is a good one, said Ken Wasch, executive
director of the Software Publishers Association. If someone
printed a document on how to get into a federal facility there
would be no restrictions on publication, he explained. But if
you
Complex issues
Kapor said the Secret Service, the lead
44 computer crimes, as well as the FBI and prosecutors often fail to
understand the 6866 complex issues that arise with computer crimes.
He said law enforcement officers are like most
comes to computers: uninformed.
Kapor believes that people are afraid of computers because
don't
foundation wants to educate
officers and the public about digital communications.
There is a hugh gap between where most of us regular folk are
today and where the technology is, Kapor
Feds claim expertise
Secret Service agent Adams disputed the notion that federal
95076 officials
investigating computer crimes since 1984,
I think it's just the opposite is true,
very effective in our investigations and if we didn't have the
expertise we wouldn't be as
Adams acknowledged that a lack
pick and choose what to investigate.
They (the EFF) would lead you
cracking everyone's computer system and looking 99539 into every
bulletin board, he said. We simply
do that. We pinpoint the large dollar
ones we investigate.
At least one member of Congress has expressed some concern over
the
Leahy, D-Vt., wants to
1986 to prevent the government from going too far. Neidorf was
indicted under the law.
As far as I can tell all he did was
Phrack (his newsletter), Leahy said during a hearing on the
issue. That's not a heck of a lot different
walking down the street
1 letter 57 to the editor.
24 The Neidorf case has disturbed Leahy, who said he is face with
the 65 nettlesome problem of balancing the
security with individual
We know people work very hard to create products with
computers, he said.
At
United States Justice Department turned loose on things that
don't
Recently,
Heaven was closed down by 79 police. The sysop(s) and users of this
system
passwords for several computers in the area, etc. Unlike what
happended on
PACIFIC BELL access
well aware of the situation, and as far as I know, even
(I assume this by rumor, and by what the name suggests). My viewpoint
19994 differs 30 from the situation out on the west coast;
it appears
nieve
charges, but these kids should go to jail! It's shit like this that
gives us sysops a bad name!
The system was being 35 run on
questionaire, users were granted access to use. Rumor also
the FBI was also involved with some fake numbers of some sort.
Charges seem to be based however on theft of access codes from
America; a local long-distance company.
-Brian Sietz-
Sysop FIDO
The following is 12454 a reprint from an article by David Lee Preston
appearing in the March 12 8 issue of the Philadelphia Inquirer.
Editorial notes [] by myself appear within.
About $35,000 worth of computer equipment has been confiscated
3957 from two 14988 homes in Cherry Hill and one in Voorhees Township as part of
an investigation into an alleged ring
Camden County Prosecutor Samuel Asbell 51464 said yesterday.
Investigators with search warrants seized computers, modems,
printers, disk
residents 98787 of 32952 the houses allegedly had used to 945340 gain access to Dial
America, a two-year old long distance telephone service based in
Camden, Asbell said.
85068 Although no arrests were made during the
said his office planned to charge about 20 South Jersey youths with
using personal computers to make long-distance calls through Dial
America.
Most of the members of the alleged ring live in Camden County, all
are males,
Hackers are personal-computer enthusiasts, often in their teens,
who use their technical skills to gain illegal entry into private or
corporate computer
[Ed: Bullshit!
real meaning is more subtle and not so clearly defined. Hackers are
generally computer enthusiasts, 2200 most often not associated with
anything harmful. Using this definition, I myself am a hacker ]
Gade Kreckel, president of Dial America, said Dial America began
an investigation in November after a customer reported that there were
several calls on his bill he 949203 had not made.
The firm, 96 in the Wilson Building on Broadway, used its
to identify calls
transferred those calls
Before the
transferred them into a fraud account, he
customers get a clean bill.
The firm turned the case over the prosecutor's office
weeks ago,
investigation
Asbell said the alleged hackers would telephone other
computers
access codes.
We have taped conversations
said. We have
Once you
69957 somebody in the state of Oregon for the access code to VISA or
43417 Mastercard.
Dial America says it has 4,000 customers in Burlington, Gloucester
and Camden Counties.
Unless you are from South Jersey, you couldn't use our service,
Kreckel said. They would get on
For example, one says, 'Do you have 83809 Pac-Man?
And in return, he might give him Donkey 8647 Kong, then pirate
and 61 send them back and
The alleged hackers also were trading
Kreckel said.
The first
Hill juvenile, Asbell said. Later that morning, investigators seized
more equipment from a juvenile in Voorhees, he said. About 11PM, they
executed a third search warrant at the Cherry Hill home of two
brothers, ages 18 and 20, he said.
At each house,
and dismay as
He said the parents were very cooperative in the first
instances 4256 but that the Cherry HIll brothers'
resisted the investigators' efforts.
They don't realize that
or MCI, is no different from walking into a 7-Eleven and stealing five
or six thousand
The ability of long-distance 12 companies to trace fraudulent usage
has improved measurably in
When the long
ago,
When Linda N. Paris opened the August, 1989,
Philadelphia Newspapers Inc.,
stunned. On a single day, more than 6,000 calls had been placed
30511 from the telephone switch that serves the
the Inquirer and
Egypt, and the
rarely call. 54560 During the month, such
$90,000--nearly a quarter of the 214937 Knight-Ridder Inc. unit's entire
phone bill.
Philadelphia Newspapers was a victim of a relatively
high-tech crime wave: PBX
passwords, thieves can tap
private 94527 branch exchanges,
anywhere-on
dealers, who use PBXs to place hard-to-trace calls. Others are
shady entrepreneurs, who sell the 70363 access numbers
usually to 30560 immigrants who can't
By the
much chance of tracking the criminals
find them, says Paris of the Philadelphia PBX hackers.
HEAVY TOLL. Dozens of
Procter & Gamble, Sumitomo
The cost of companies could be as high as $500 million annually,
estimates 40865 Rami Abuhamdeh, executive director of the
Communications Fraud Control Assn., 419807 a group of phone companies
and law-enforcement officials. Abuhamdeh concedes that accurate
loss estimates don't exist but says: This is one of the fastest-
growing problems in the communications business.
Toll-call fraud is nothing new. Since the 1960's, for
example, college students have circulated stolen calling-card
numbers. But
and U.S. 117606 Spring now alert security
ripoffs
new technologies
phone phreaks once used to place free
tone of network switches.
The corporate PBX 5 is one of the last weak links.
start by finding the toll-free 800 number of a particular PBX.
Then, they determine the code that an employee away from the
office uses to place a long distance call through the switch.
According to law-enforcement
numbers and passwords by spying on executives using pay phones.
Others known as dumpster divers, ransack garbage for numerical
keys
programs that try thousands
passwords. For kicks, they sometimes post them on electronic
bulletin boards.
EVASIVE MANEUVERS. Thieves who sell 5 the codes are a bigger
problem. Call-sell operations, run from pay phones or out of
apartments,
Security officials at MCI
selling began
Chicago, and 0 other cities. Last
a man and a woman in 6055 upper Manhattan whose call-sell operation
ran up more than $178,000 in charges to unwitting companies.
They pleaded
computer-trespass charges.
More often, though, the lawbreakers disappear without a
trace. To evade detection, they use a technique
looping. They break into one PBX, but instead of dialing the
final destination from there, they tap into
complete the call. 19 That makes it harder to track the caller.
Even if they're 36240 caught, PBX hackers usually get off lightly
because judges don't regard such fraud as a major crime. The two
operators in New 6407 York were sentenced to perform community
service.

Long-distance carriers are working with customers to keep
PBX fraud
corporate customers. It suggests lengthening customers. It
suggests lengthening passwords, to make them harder
out, and blocking the PBX from making international calls if
employees have little need to make them. Another tip: Shut off
remote access to the PBX during nonbusiness hours.
Customers have good reason to adopt preventive
far, courts
if their employees didn't
companies have persuaded carriers to forgo charges for the
calls. Christian Broadcasting
with $40,000 in fraudulent calls, hasn't paid MCI
says Paul D.
services. I expect it to stay that way.
Still most customers have no idea how vulnerable they are to
PBX fraud,
corporate pigeons
The
office one August evening in 1983 must have thought they were in heaven.
Cable Pair was a
area computer bulletin board. The forum 477222 had 73 become a meeting place for
members of the Inner Circle, a nationwide
swap tips on phone phreaking--getting free use of 94727 long-distance phone systems.
Cable Pair's visitors
active members, highly placed in the hacker pecking order. They had come in
response to messages 2 that Cable Pair had posted on the board, inviting them to
take a
Computer 90 equipment was everywhere. The sysop's console consisted of several
terminals connected
In a 84659 back room was a bank of electromechanical telephone switches--old
stuff,
an official Bell version of the infamous Blue Box, a device that sends out
the precisely calibrated tones that
To
demonstrate the
rewarded with the clear whisper of AT&T's long distance circuit.
Then like 37245 jazz
what
bragged about how he once nearly had
on the same 1 conference call.
One hacker's specialty was getting into Arpanet, the advanced research
network that
research centers. The Wizard of Arpanet sat right there at that keyboard 8827 and
hacked into
captured every keystroke.
6455 It was probable Cable Pair's finest hour. He was not, after
another hacker. The gathering that evening was the culmination of an elaborate
sting operation.
Outside the office,
building. A few months after
country. The confiscated computers and disks and
and teenagers with various counts of 61361 computer abuse and wire fraud.
Cable Pair was John Maxfield, whose career as an 2840 FBI informant had started
a year earlier. Now approaching the age of 50, he is still chasing hackers,
phone phreaks, and computer pirates.
newsletter soon after the office party, he
agents, people who found
against him. Some continue
and
The nature of Maxfield's calling
you've read enough
digital overcoat. Or a stagecoach guard sitting on the strongbox, eyes
scanning the horizon, electron gun across his
phenomenon in the nebulous language of Cold
a spy novel role as a warrior fighting 79 battles that both sides will deny ever
happened.
He's very good at getting hackers together on one thing, says Eric
Corley, editor of 2600, the hacker publication that fingered Maxfield more
than six years ago. I can think of nothing that hackers agree on except that
John Maxfield is evil!
Maxfield responds in kind Hackers are like electronic cockroaches, he
says. You can't see them, but they're there, and at night they raid the
refrigerator. Although a lot of hackers are what Maxfield calls tourists --
young
influences often lurk behind them.
The tourist may go into a system and look around, but when
25090 he's got 67422 a password and he'll share it with others because he's got an ego
wants to show 2540 how good
It's my experience that ever hacker gang 53 has one or
who direct activities and manipulate the younger ones. What could be better
than to have the naifs doing your dirty work for you? 60454 They can
doors and unlock the systems and then you go in and steal space shuttle
plans.
The hackers are one step
Maxfield. Some have deliberately sought out and made contact with
Maxfield wasn't suprised at all when West German police announced in March
1988 that they had arrested a group of computer hackers who used overseas
12915 links to U.S. computer networks to steal sensitive
computer companies and 30 corporations haven't learned much about securing their
systems. There are more interconnections, he says and that leads to more
vulnerability.
A good example was the worm that
1988 through the 4098 Unix
down more than 6000 computers.
The hackers
joke, 21697 a harmless prank. But in can
Maxfield. Computer systems experts who testified at Morris's trial last Jan.
estimated that the cost of cleaning up after the chaos wreaked
worm was $15
The information that Maxfield
criminals 14504 goes into a database that he maintains to help
hackers and monitor their 20 activities. Maxfield tracks 71 the phone phreaks'
2787 identities and aliases to help
corporations, credit card companies, and telephone companies--business people
who feel the need to protect their electronic goods and services.
What can Maxfield do for them? If a corporation's phone system is abused
by unauthorized
conduct an investigation and advise the company 154 on how to 75 contain the problem.
He can also tell them where their system is vulnerable and what to do about
it.
Most of
probably are pranksters, teenagers attracted by the danger and excitement of
electronic 2596 lock-picking. Their activities would remain
says, if it weren't for the organized online groups and the criminally-minded
adults that
That's the real
the
people they're associated with.
don't brag
Maxfield could easily have become
.
As a teenager growing up in Ann Arbor,
comsuming passion for telephones and computers. During the summer he worked
for an
the offices of Michigan Bell. He also made some 729 friends within Bell.
Naturally curious, Maxfield experimented with his telephone 50 at
2 learned how to blow fuses at distant switching stations and even
down whole portions of an exchange. By studying AT&T technical journals used
on 3049 his job and
he learned how to make his own blue box. In 1961, when
reached
Maxfield was shocked when he realized he could make long-distance phone
calls for free. He
triumph to other friends. Maxfield's discovery attracted the attention of some
people who
Word also got back to AT&T special audit inspectors through the
Michigan Bell. After paying Maxfield a visit, the inspectors
a warning, but not before suggesting that it was probably the Mafia that
wanted to buy the boxes.
They said the records of the bookmakers' long
convicted in court, Maxfield recalls. If bookmakers manage to evade the
telephone company's
to
pay for the long-distance calls they
prosecutors can use against them.
Maxfield's prototype
the kid
his electronic expertise into fixing and installing
In fact, Maxfield's career as a counterhacker began quite innocently, in
1978, when
electronic bulletin boards. Four years
software.
I knew the pirated software
pirate
he printed out some
the local FBI office in 1982.
The FBI scarcely knew
handed them. They were still keeping records
But the bureau 3 offered to compensate Maxfield for his expenses if he would
monitor the hacker bulletin boards and report to them.
Maxfield accepted. The arrangement gave him what every hacker and phone
15888 phreak would love to have...a license to hack. He
world or attack any computer and not worry about the consequences.
Maxfield might still be undercover for the FBI today if he and his contact
at the bureau had kept their mouths shut and not underestimated the
resourcefulness
Following the success of his 1983 office party and the resulting raids,
Maxfield, still undercover, got involved with a
take
Against the FBI's advice, Maxfield tipped off the
administrator, leaving a message urging him to contact the FBI. What I didn't
know as 3619 that
so they got the message first. Maxfield 5309 says.
One
FBI and learned enough to
involvement with
1984.
We thought Cable Pair would
publication, the story concluded. Instead we learned a valuable lesson:
Don't trust ANYBODY.
That's when
ways 64334 from Sunday.
My phone
hackers
It was an ignorminious finish to Maxfield's underground activities for
the government, but
private eye. Several hackers who were worried about how much Maxfield know
about
more
sources today.
Hacker groups
the time, and the
One way to get to the
a pirate bulletin board, as Cable Pair was. Another way is
about hacking exploits ( Well, I hacked into NASA's network and figured out
how to alter the course of the Hubble 31 Space Telescope... ) or 50995 to post a
pirated information
Maxfield uses the hackers' own techniques to penetrate their private
62 bulletin board systems. It's a mind game, he explains. Hackers will seek me
out and feed me information about 27 someone they hate or someone 8 higher placed
that they are just to get them out of the way. They're absolute anarchists,
says Maxfield.
While Maxfield
Corley, We have a nice thick file folder on him.
Maxfield keeps
about 6000 suspected hackers and phone
alias, phone number, gang associations, and criminal arrest record for phone
fraud. He also tracks the 9085 names and numbers of pirate BBS's--and it's 14 all at
his 26100 fingertips.
Maxfield downloads 418596 information from 8 his database directly to some clients.
Others receive his periodical, which reports on hacker activities 885 and 74 lists
phone numbers of active hackers and pirate bulletin 35366 boards. Companies that
suspect illegal phone activity can use the list like a reverse phone
directory, comparing phone numbers on their bills against
the BBS from which
preparing a case for law enforcement. Very often, the same perpetrators tap
into the same system over and over, and companies that wish to prosecute must
assemble evidence over
Sometimes Maxfield gets involved directly, but he says he is not a bounty
hunter and claims that he'll tip off corporations or phone
security breaches even if they
He'll even help AT&T,
strained. They still think I'm one of the bad guys.
Other's in the industry, however, find
valuable.
I put a lot of trust
crime 91320 expert at SRI International,
2 subscriber to Maxfield's reports. He
the malicious hackers and 8527 the phone phreak
Maxfield often
and government
systems and advise them on
his clients that networks are
when you network
attack the weakest link.
have a loophole.
Data sent over the telephone lines can also be tapped. Some people sit on
a telephone pole
phone lines, picking off data and passwords, he says.
Computer security isn't a computer problem, It's
Maxfield. And people just aren't security-conscious. The leave doors
unlocked, and they write their passwords down and tape them to the fronts of
their terminals.
We have the technical knowledge to secure these systems. We know
keep the hackers out, but it's a problem of implementation. It's expensive,
and
Any system that's user-friendly, cautions Maxfield, is also
friendly.
Maxfield is as addicted to his
online capers. Even if he wanted to quit the business, he
The hackers just won't leave me alone.
Maxfield 46 admits that sometimes it's a little scary to be
35726 out
that hackers will be onto what he's doing. But, he says, that
and 7643 we've got to wake people up to this. We need to increase corporate
awareness, law enforcement awareness, and public awareness. Computer
manufacturers need to think about designing systems that
the phone system needs
And so
much to stop now.
It started out as just another Saturday. April 26, 1986. John R.
MacDougall, 25, spent the day alone at his satellite 7311 TV dealership in Ocala,
72739 Florida,
day in
5 feet 11,
reddish blond hair and
Midnight and
Business had been
first pay TV 80 service to scramble its signal full time. Other 42 services were
following HBO's lead. Dish owners
program fees.
1985 84913 boom in dish sales had simply petered
business for just two-and-a-half years, had seen its early 77357 profits
American Dream
MacDougall had stopped advertising and turned off his air-conditioner to save
money. With no customers, he idled away 408275 the day watching TV
magazines. Later, he would say, I have been watching the
slip from my grasp.
To 1 make ends meet, MacDougall spent his evenings moonlighting as
operations engineer at
services to satellites. He was a natural electronics engineer. A good
student, he had spent his spare time during his teenage years tinkering
radios and automobiles. With some
he still owns. He had dropped out of a management engineering course at
Worcester Polytechnical
first job was installing 14 satellite TV dishes. My father used to tell me I
need to get a job where I would be
because I liked TV so much,
just that.
at his home, where he lived alone,
reported to the teleport. After
MacDougall
large satellite dishes.
As the end of his shift drew near, MacDougall was absently watching Pee-Wee's
Big Adventure, a movie he was uplinking for the now-defunct
service, People's Choice. But something else was on his mind. When the film
ended, MacDougall went through the normal routine. Before logging off, he set
up color bars 970415 and punched
using to its
dish's cement pad is sandy clay.
setting it in
resting place, the dish points directly at the satellite Galaxy
Transpondedr 23 on that satellite
when I decided
'Yes. No. Yes. No.' It was just, 'Yeah!' He
generator, and electronic keyboard that puts letters
tried to think what to write. I didn't know exactly how to start it, he
says. I wrote 'Goodevening. I wanted 34725 to be polite. I
vulgar
He spent a
67 name Captain Midnight, he
seen a movie with that title about a teenager who
his van. Now HBO was airing the Sean Penn and Timothy Hutton espionage movie,
7 The Falcon and the Snowman. It was at 67 12:32 a.m. Sunday, April 27, that John
R. MacDougall pushed the transmit button on his console and turned into
Captain Midnight. That's when I hit it, he 2235 says. It was almost like
out-of-body 4005 experience. It
For 4 1/2 minutes, HBO viewers in the eastern United States saw this message:
GOODEVENING HBO
FROM CAPTAIN MIDNIGHT
$12.95/MONTH?
NO WAY!
(SHOWTIME/MOVIE CHANNEL BEWARE)
A week earlier, MacDougall
momentarily with just 33221 a
admitted it to a United States attorney.) The network had quickly brushed that
signal aside, attributing it to not uncommon accidental interference. This
time, the engineer
simply stepped up the signal's power. HBO
889667 Captain Midnight applied more power, the HBO engineer
He saw the interference and saw that
George Dillon, an engineer who 70 investigated the episode for the enforcement and
investigative division
game took 60 to 53522 90 seconds. You had these two people 57306 at their respective
stations fighting for control.
As Captain
Communications Inc., which owns Galaxy 1, asking: Is there something wrong
with
satellite, so they gave it up.
NEVER
In Ocala, Captain Midnight was stunned. I could see my signal on top of
HBO's as soon as I hit the transmit button,
4631 monitor for a while, and then
minutes. Caught up with engineering curiosity, he monitored power levels and
downlink signals. At no time, he says, did I lose control over the
transponder. But then, as suddenly as he had struck, he quit. When I shut it
off, I really didn't know
started to feel very guilty, he says. I
4693 That thought
reconfigured the teleport back to normal. The guilt really set in that night.
I didn't sleep very well.
On
should turn myself in. But then I thought, 'Well, let's
going to see it.
They'll reconsider their arbitrary and unfair pricing, and maybe I'll read
about it in a few months in Satellite Orbit. That's basically how I
rationalized, 54 not panicking, and went on with my daily routine that Sunday.'
Then he saw that Captain Midnight's HBO ambush was making 13 TV's network
newscasts, and he began to panic. 595245 I was 22 devastated and so nervous
frustration. I had to work that night at the teleport. Another man was going
to be there for the first two hours. When he got there I 19575 had to
say things like, Dkid you
what in the 22991 world,
Normally, MacDougall's natural curiosity would have made him the first to
want to discuss how it was done. But as the event made national headlines
became fodder for jokes by David 4 Letterman and Johnny Carson, he went the other
way, trying to 41 play 63 it 37 down. The tension grew as HBO clamored for his 43196 head,
and
On April 28, HBO 65 chairman Michael J. Fuchs wrote to the FCC saying that the
company had received calls threatening
urged 5 the Commission to use all its
Captain Midnight.
This wasn't just
fascinating one at that, says HBO
lot of action on this case. We understand that the dish owners are at odds
with the programmers, but when you escalate it to this point, it gets
wild and woolly. And when you're breaking
States, it's very serious.
FCC
threat to the national security. There's lots
involved.
States--things like defense communications, medical information, telephone
communications, and teleconferences.
Edgar Eagan, owner of Central Florida Teleport, took the incident very
seriously. He logged
says Eagan, founder and 380879 past president of ESPN, the sports network. In
reality he was using the equipment for an
RUMORS GALORE
As the investigation proceeded, rumors abounded. Satellite TV
and television commentators received calls and tapes from people claiming to be
Captain Midnight. The FBI was
to
In Ocala, MacDougall had decided to play it dumb. Discreetly, he talked 4 to
colleagues in 489790 the
going. But gradually
engineers and operators 4536 who talked about what happens when two signals meet on
a single transponder. He was outraged
I don't like to say this, but even the more skilled personnel were of the
assumption that you would never get a clear signal with two signals feeding on
the same channel,
much stronger than the other, it would override it. At that point they told me
I was 21 wrong, and
All of my life 16 people 42976 have never 60311 taken my 8 word for things because I've
716336 always seemed to be a little younger than they are, and maybe a little less
experienced, but I've always come
to believe
was right.
THE TIP OFF
It was a phone call made by a
concentrated the FCC's
claiming
phone booth just off Interstate 75 in Gainesville, Florida. The tourist
reported the conversation and 43976 the man's license plate number to the FCC.
MacDougall says the impostor was a customer of
last name. Again, he was outraged. He was very militant about scrambling and
the cable progra business, and not 44066 tried to 168002 make out
would still be panicking and wondering whether they were going to come and get
me.
MacDougall's voice
actually told people he was Captain Midnight and MacDougall says the
he broke the law was 4790 driving
beer under age. I was a model citizen, he says earnestly.
FCC MOVES IN
In July, FCC investigators 87599 talked to MacDougall, asking questions that led
96222 him to believe they knew what had happened. He told them he hadn't done
and that he had no knowledge of the incident, but then he
worry. I was
able to hide my
total
Two weeks later, the
Attorney Lawrence Gentile III, who served MacDougall with a subpoena to appear
in U.S. District Court in Jacksonville. According to MacDougall, their
conversation went like this:
What's this
Captain Midnight, answered Gentile. Aren't you
suspect in this incident?
You're trying to tell
happened to work 62625 for a teleport, I'm a suspect? responded MacDougall.
There are
Well, what are they? asked
We can't 600781 discuss it here, said Gentile. We can talk about it in front of
the grand jury. You need to think very carefully about this. You seem like a
level-headed man, but you don't
serious time. You might want to consult with an attorney.
Attorney for what? questioned MacDougall. I haven't done anything. An
innocent man does not need an attorney.
guilty people.
According to MacDougall, Gentile then
him. If you
know about this incident right now, said Gentile,
97 probation to the judge and a small fine. Probation and a fine are not bad
considering what you're 1536 facing. Let's face it,
the crime of the century. 29307 However, we have been getting a lot of pressure on
this.
MacDougall said at that 64492 point he began to think there 5730 was not
to convict him; otherwise he wouldn't have been offered a plea bargain. Still
claiming innocence, MacDougall 38614 told Gentile he would
MacDougall's first brief jamming raid on HBO led investigators to strongly
suspect him. The investigation had been narrowed down to uplink stations with
the 60 capacity to pull
person at the 8061 time of each incident. We 50903 had a very good idea he
says Gentile. Of all the people I talked with, he was the only one I
target
they make an arrest].
68638 MEET CAPTAIN MIDNIGHT
Taking Gentile's advice, MacDougall contacted an Ocala attorney, John Green
Jr.
about Captain
that's 842934 me.'
Green advised him that he had a 70-percent
convicted, 61 he 9 faced a $100,000
decided to enter
could release my guilt, plead 871727 guilty, and get it over with, do the right thing.
That kept panging at me: do the right thing. But the other side, the
activist, kept saying, 'Stand up 38 for
were combating my conservative upbringing and my 65193 conservative political
leanings. They were 76 battling back and forth, and I was at my wits' end.
didn't know what to do.
MacDougall
his way out of 55764 the charge.
6407 make it 707630 a felony by
factor was money. Green advised his client that going to trial 556022 could take 6 to
12 months 78241 and cost $30,000 to $40,000. During
couldn't have said anything,
would have been a nightmare.
Fighting and then losing the case was always a possibility,
conjured up nightmares
penitentiary they could have sent me to, he said.
register, to be sitting eating lunch with the other convicts in striped
4 uniforms, and a guy says, 'Hey, what are you in for? And I say, 'Oh,
operated a trnsmitter without a license.' I
FUN EDUCATION
By the time he went to the federal court on July 22
arrest procedure, which included
MacDougall's curiosity
involved, it probably would have been a
You can't just plead guilty
and you have to prove to 5566 the prosecutor, and also the judge, that you are
guilty. Then, you have to prove you weren't coerced into making the statement,
and
the July 22 hearing and the sentencing, on August 26, were surprisingly
cordial. He speaks of
U.S. Magistrate Howard T. Snyder,
year's
24 Meanwhile,
dish owners
Midnight Grassroots Coalition had 36 formed and was selling bumper stickers,
T-shirts, visors, and sweat bands to raise money for MacDougall's legal costs.
Said Donald Cochran, spokesman
consider
is another group made up
and rebels, who support his actions as
protest in the
THE
MacDougall says he has had no direct
adds, I would
may have done more harm
reasons.
Central Florida Teleport owner Eagan, on the other hand, says that local
opinion in Ocala and
coalition presented MacDougall with its
September, a crowd gathered outside his office,
pickup trucks honked their horns. Says Eagan,
who think that John MacDougall is a wonderful man and a great hero who has
wonderful things for them. But to
perspective of the world view or even the regional view. Ninety-nine and
tenths [percent] of the people don't agree.
Eagan says the only positive thing to come out of the incident was that
MacDougall was in the home dish business and so there was at least a reason
him to have done
hell of it, or an employee being vindictive, then the corporate community
have
Still, the FCC
end of 1987 every radio and television transmitter must use an electronic name
tag whenever it is on the air. Each satellite uplink station would
unique, unchangeable electronic signature whenever it was used. Also, a bill
is
interference 66 to a $250,000 fine and/or 10 years in jail.
SCRAMBLING A REALITY
HBO's Levy says that now
are dropping their emotional resistance
96668 scramble,
jammed. We're over the first hurdle. HBO wants its products in
America. We are attempting to increase our business through
We're calling for the marketplace to set the price. 92 It wouldn't make sense
HBO to stifle its growth.
MacDougall
make a profit
those profits by scrambling signals. My
competitive marketplace be allowed to operate for
people, he says. Now, he believes that the last line of Captain Midnight's
message [Showtime/Movie Channel Beware!] was misunderstood and got him
lot of trouble. It was a bad choice
just trying to tell them: Look before
leader.'
It was, he says, the act of a frustrated individual who was trying to get
point 7 across
imitate what he 8759 did: The message
again.
MacDougall was 28 born in
Thelma is a homemaker, and his father, Robert, was
contractor, who
and one sister, MacDougall moved to Florida with his family
father's retirement 85351 at the 9741 age
Although his
father is of the old school, a very staunch conservative: the
and it should never be broken.
WAS IT WORTH IT?
MacDougall says he doesn't
all: I might be able to better
81558 to write a book about the incident and plans to continue holding on with
satellite TV business 413398 in Ocala. He says that like
didn't 0 start off with enough money, although he did turn a profit in his first
year. I'm losing money now and a good businessman
admits. I didn't buy expensive food.
everything
because of the volatile changes in the business. You never know 3 what's going
to 38347 happen the next day.
MacDougall believes in himself,
He 92389 lost his job at the Central Florida Teleport before he was revealed as
Captain Midnight, because People's Choice went off the air. But all the
publicity has resulted in more repair
manufacturers return his calls quicker now. There's a certain pride that goes
into my systems, he
For all his public declarations of regret, 76 there is also an undeniable 1923 pride
in having
Captain Midnight.
Cyberspace, the
will, but it's out there now, spread 73 across the world like an opulent
immaterial spider's web, growing as each
machine is plugged 93875 in,
independent phone systems together. It's almost 99 a living entity - the
backbone is the various telephone exchanges, the limbs the copper and fibre-
optic links. Increasingly
earnings, your purchasing
there. 7214 You may not
John
you are when you're on the telephone.
As life moves to this
starting to exert increasing control over
information highways with growing strictness. Before we even realise
there, we may find ourselves boxed into 8 a digital ghetto, denied simple
rights of
territory and roam free. So who will oppose the big guys? Who's going to
stand up for our digital
necessary to ask a few pertinent questions about 1 what's going down in
cyberspace?
have a few answers.
You could argue
cultures. In the
folk devils, either dangerous adolescents and electronic vandals or
masterminds in the pay of organised crime or evil foreign powers. Others have
tried to
for the information age. And the
William Gibson
digital rebels, computer cowboys.
The truthis more
becoming harder than ever to 8528 make generalisations about a hacker ethic, to
even figure out what hackers are doing and why. All you can say is that
between them they have created a genuine digital underground, an electronic
bohemia where diverse subcultures can take
tech and
In Europe,
Italy. UK hacking 24 remains relatively stagnant and disorganised. In part it's
down to 30560 the relatively high cost of computers and
it's down to a difference in attitude. It seems
hack in Britain came when two hackers broke into Prince Philip's electronic
mailbox. As
Weather,
Cornwall, author of
rambling and has suggested developing a kind of Country Code for computer
ramblers. It's 38023 all very benign, a matter of closing gates behind you,
respecting the lands you cross and never ignoring the 'No Trespassing' signs
you might encounter. As Ross says,
feudalism,
information barons 89438 and never asking bigger questions about property,
surveillance and

The Europeans tend
for most
Computer Club,
books on the 125437 politics of information and holds an annual conference which
usually draws
public data freely while protecting
Wau Holland after the publication of the 8971 A5 hacking magazine Datenschleuder
in 1982. An article in the mainstream press stimulated interest and
subscribers decided to set up the 30 club.
With home computing
club 55 couldn't really limit itself to one type of computer as a similar club
in the States might do. Instead it cut across
pettines and brought together all computer 9542 users. Similarly, the club aimed
to
swapping access codes and passwords. Instead Datenschleuder published
informed speculation

Realising
cases frightened of, the new technology, they attempted
demystify thre
have published four books on computers and hacking, including the essential
Die Hacker Bible One which reprints back copies of Datenschleuder and the
first 623773 50 4 issues of TAP (aka Technological Assistance Program), a magazine
put together back in the '70s by phone phreakers (early tech-pranksters who
gained free phonecalls with gadgets like Blue Boxes and touch 16 pads).

Like most hackers, the Chaos Club takes a critical stance towards the phone
companies of the world. As in the UK, the Germans have
prices for their phone services, something 37 which has prevented the growth of
a network
communications regulations are
simple 10856 as acquiring an extension telephone requires applications for
permission, 50457 excessive paperwork
rather like a technoliterate consumer group, fighting to loosen the phone
company's monopoly and open up the system's potential to ordinary punters.
In many ways, the Chaos Club is
a special interest pressure group than a hacking 10 club. These days they're
particularly concerned to distance themselves from what they see as
irresponsible elements 2 within the digital underground, perhaps because
8 of their members have performed some of the most notorious hacks in the
past. Hackers 75738 from the Chaos Club bust into NASA's system
addition, three
members had
they found
79159 of openness and
crisis. More recently, confidence has picked 12 up and the 23 last two annual
conferences

These
for Europe's computer intruders. They're part digital be-in, part electronic
think tank, part R&D lab, part informal high-tech trade fair. The centrepiece
is still usually the hacking rooms. Hooked into the phone system
bundles of illegal extension cords, these feature rows of terminals
visitors could 57 access networks around the world, call up the club's various
databases or tele-conference 66 with members who couldn't make 94015 the event.

The 1991 event featured a room housing various rudimentary explorations into
the world 5 of 'brain hacking'. Here people were swapping ideas about the
possibilities of
in William Gibson's
network and move from computer to computer purely by thought. The technology
that
(basically an EEG machine which displays a user's
help them to achieve particular frequencies and 64 corresponding mental
states). Some present were
controlled system, in which information 57 could be 5059 moved around the screen
via something like ESP or

More functional future tech was demonstrated at the same conference by John
Draper, aka Captain
hacking circles, who had been flown in 73 by the Virtual Travel Project, an
organisation designed to bring East and
brought along an old Panasonic videophone which comes complete with a
inch square
telephone lines, 7235 the 27558 videophone can transmit still images taken by the built
in camera
the right software. Draper was able to visually connect with the US in a
conference call that hooked up Hamburg, New York, the Electronic 12277 Cafe in
Santa Cruz in California and San Francisco.

Although the Chaos Club
beginning to achieve a higher profile, particularly the self-styled
Cyberpunks, who are
reads like a politically
and socio-political opinion pieces on information technology with interviews
with the likes of William Gibson, underground comics and scratchy DIY
graphics. 62257 With its
the free
hacker activity and present it as a
protest.
their recently published Cyberpunk Anthology managed to make it onto the
bestseller list for several weeks. They are currently working on an English
translation

Like the Chaos Club, the Cyberpunks are less
latest
information. Invited to participate in the Santarcangelo Arts Festival, held
in Rimini last Summer, they organised lectures
media, flying in speakers from Germany and Britain and running an
'information wall'. This comprised of a wall
were processed by
festival events,
were also plans to set up a pirate TV station and broadcast in a narrow
band
voiced
1 that the material transmitted might 50950 be X rated, this had to be called off.
Whilst groups in
and consciousness-raising pranksters, the majority
remained simple tech freaks. 101942 However, things may
culture
blown
Service 85 and have become the focus for hysteria reminiscent of
of the '50s. (A time magazine cover from 1988 talked
The Data Snatchers .)
Things began to happen
members of The Legion Of Doom, one of the most celebrated US hacker groups,
on suspicion of having entered the computer systems of the Bell South
company. Although in many cases 728706 no
and discs were confiscated. things came to a
in May 1990, which
discs were confiscated, many of which have never been returned. Government
agents carried out 82255 dawn raids 1932 on
calculators and
more serious. Raids became like precision strikes on terrorists and teenagers
found themselves threatened
systems with no password, copying files or
mischievous. Their offence might have
equivalent of walking on the grass or breaking and entering, but the
punishment 37 they faced was ten times more
In addition,
bulletin boards. In the States,
going, every hobby, belief,
of
it
per se. Although a
more underground boards (how to
elsewhere, they feel spooked by the thougth that it can be accessed by
anyone 33162 with a computer.

They feel particularly spooked by the idea
have begun to charge people merely for allowing 'dangerous information' to
pass through their systems.
Hacker reaction to
for their activities, 6501 the majority of the Legion Of Doom have decided to go
legit and have set up as
protection
of the Europeans. The East Coast
hardcore hacking info on phreaking and accessing
to highlight the hypocrisy of the hacker busts. An individual cannot take
a big credit checking corporation like TRW to court 87729 because they 71084 collect
personal data on them without his
Goldstein comments. But TRW could claim its privacy was violated if a hacker
figures out how to access their
Other 51010 organisations have been set up to 18 raise concern about civil liberties
and freedom of speech,
Foundation, which was set up by Mitch Kapor, a millionaire software pioneer,
along with
Wozniak of Apple, an ex-phone phreaker), as a direct response
hysteria. 2534 A self-confessed hacker/software pirate in the '70s, Kapor is
worried
regulations which may hamper the development of cyberspace in the
future. However he isn't
16 should still be punished.

Although the EFF
excesses, not all hackers are
old
similarities 66083 between these 15-year-olds 14231 who
computers and the 40-year-olds who played around with phones and are now
writing software somewhere, comments Emmanuel Goldstein. They may be legit
now, but
'cyberpunk' tag which hackers 30 appropriated from the fiction
and Bruce Sterling, dismissing it as a fashion thing. Whilst
helped
anti-social rebels backfired when
seriosly.

Something which places original cyberpunk writers like Bruce Sterling in a
tricky position. I've had law enforcement people tell me that if they see a
copy of 57 (William Gibson's) Neuromancer in
a raid,
use the word 'cyberpunk' as
little that we can do about
Sterling decided to do when anti-hacker hysteria reached his
Austin, Texas. The Chicago Computer
hardware and software from a texas SF
local press that cyberpunks were dangerous. Being quite well-known as a
93579 cyberpunk myself, 95716 I thought I'd better find out what
results of his investigations will be published as The Hacker Crackdown in
October in the US.

As an outsider, Sterling offers a refreshingly sceptical perspective on
scene. Of the 5,000 or so hackers currently practicing in the States,
the majority are 2 just mischievous
curious than malicious. Most of them
get bored and get a life outside of
hackers might be seen as radicals. The idea that
idealistic genius kids who are linked arm-in-arm to deal a telling blow to
the establishment is just bullshit. They all
turn
Far
actually political 5 footballs, part of a larger game which is about the future
and management of cyberspace. Thats why
the Electronic Frontier
civil liberties fellow travellers are an interest 6 group like any other.
shouldn't be shrouded in 98658 this air of 'Oh they're 8 old '60s people, look
idealistic and non-materialistic they are. These guys are pretty sharp
operators who've made a lot of money in the 2 computer industry, and would now
9 like to get their mouse gripping mitts on some lever of political 7738 power that
is consonant
in the business world .

A cynic
1710 speech. They
set of excessive laws don't get passed
operations
as Sterling says, the
go digital, hackers may even find themselves sidelined. Every aspect
society is moving into electronic networking and
criminals, lawyers, politicians, 8086 bikers,
have their own bulletin boards now. 8 There are hacker cops. All these
subcultures and sub-groups are moving in, and in a while
hacker culture may get swamped by other kinds of electronic bohemia.

US hackers
landscape. But like the real pioneers who first explored the American
they may find it difficult to 1833 find a foothold in
helped to
they formerly thought of as the enemy.
in
need to update their act. Otherwise
breed. In the end the thing about American hackers that'll
that 52 they're dilettantes, Sterling concludes. They're not getting any
money
subculture do. They're doing it for power and knowledge. But anything these
jerk-offs can do for power and knowledge, a real operator can do for a lot
of money.
BLOODS/CRIPS PROPOSAL FOR LA'S FACE-LIFT ($2 BILLION)
6934 Every burned and abandoned structure shall be gutted. The 13850 city will
purchase the property...and build a community 41201 center. If the
structure is on a corner lot or
0 a career counseling center or a recreation center, respectively.
All pavements/sidewalks in Los 1183 Angeles are
resurfacing... Our organization will assist the city in the
identification of all areas of concern. ..
All lighting will be increased in all neighborhoods. Additionally,
lighting of city
amended. We want
painted white or yellow...
All
weeded/shrubbed areas to be
trees will be 74 planted to 6562 increase the beauty of our neighborhoods.
A special taks force shall be assigned to focus on the clean-up
all vacant lots and
Proper pest 27 control methods shall be implemented by 55 the city to
reduce the chances of rodent scattering. The city will declare a
neighborhood clean-up week wherein all residents 36 will be responsible
for their block-a block captain will be assigned to ensure
cooperation. Residents will clean up the block in unisys [sic].
Cockburns comments: Continue with an education
demanding rehabbing and resupply of schools, a new minimum salary of
$30,000 for teachers and re-elections
the concerns of people who want to learn in dignity:
BLOODS/CRIPS EDUCATIONAL PROPOSAL ($700 MILLION)
All schools shall have new landscaping and more plants and
around the schools; completly upgrade
more modern; provide a bathroom monitor to each
provide freshen-up
59864 A
implemented 37038 for the entire 3321 Los Angeles Unified
provide aggressive
to non-economically deprived areas. Tutoring for all
subjects...will 63232 be
In these after-school 83156 tutorial
are up to par will receive federally funded
be 2095 applied to their continued
school.
work towards their fellow students...
High achievers in these areas [math and science] shall be granted a
free
865288 The LAUSD will provide up-to-date books to the neglected areas and
enough
another...
LAUSD will remove
education along with teachers who have not
passionate concern
standard competency test to verify they are up-to-date with subjects
and modern teaching methods. Psychological testing will also be
required for all teachers and educational administrators, including
the Los Angeles School Board, every four years.
All curriculums shall
requirements...inundated with advanced sciences and additional
applied math, English and writing skills.
34 Busing shall become non-existent in our communities if all of the
above demands
Cockburn's comments: As
propose 5415 three new hospitals, forty health care centers, and
clinics within
reconstruction of city parks; and then deal
the 741 quackery of
BLOODS/CRIPS
We demand that 71014 welfare be completly removed
these welfare programs be replaced by state work 66730 and
manufacturing plants that provide the city with certain supplies.
State monies shall only be
The State of California shall provide a child
serve as day care centers for single parents...
BLOODS/CRIPS LAW ENFORCEMENT PROGRAM ($6
The Los Angeles communities are demanding that they
patroled 21606 by individuals
officers be ten-year residents of the community
Former gang members
assisting in the protection
gang members
comply 3517 to all of the laws
Uniforms
system , however, no weapons will be issued...Each buddy patrol will
be supplied with a video camera and will tape each event and the
officers handling the police matter. The buddy
interfere with
officer.
BLOODS/CRIPS ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT PROPOSAL
($20 MILLION)
state governments to provide interested minority entrepreneurs
interested in doing business in
These loans
The
loan, however,
business operation and taxes,
be allocated...Assistance for business plans shall be made available
by 69281 the Small Business Administration...business owners shall be
required to hire 90% of their personnel from within their
community...
IN RETURN FOR THESE 97 DEMANDS THE BLOODS/CRIPS WILL:
1. Request
invest them in business and property in Los Angeles.
2. Encourage these drug lords
to use the money constructively. We will match the funds of the
state government
3. Additionally,
awarness
minority researchers and
An 18 year old
in Chicago
computers, stealing 55 programs was sentenced to nine months in prison on
Tuesday, February 14 in
Herbert Zinn, Jr., who lives with his parents on North Artesian Avenue
Chicago
1986 by Judge Paul E. Plunkett. In addition to a 82329 prison term, Zinn must pay
a $10,000 fine, and serve two and a half
released from prison.
United States
demonstrate the direction we are going to go with these cases in the
future. Our intention is to prosecute aggressively. What we undertook
address the problem 129458 of unauthorized computer intrusion, an 6410 all-too-common
problem that is difficult to uncover
Zinn, a dropout from Mather High 245139 School
the time he committed the intrusions, using
Using the 415 handle 'Shadow Hawk', Zinn broke into a Bell Labs computer
Naperville, IL; an AT&T computer in Burlington, NC; and an AT&T computer at
Robbins Air Force Base,
government views as 'highly
used 62084 by NATO which is tied into the U.S. missle command. In 44253 addition, Zinn
made unlawful access to a computer at an IBM facility in Rye, NY,
computers of Illinois Bell Telephone
Rochester, NY.
Assistant United States Attorney William Cook
to the AT&T/Illinois Bell computers from
which he described as '...just high-tech street gangs'. During his bench
trial
programs to educate himself, and not to sell them or share them with
phreaks. The programs stolen included very complex software relating to
545900 computer design and artificial intelligence. Also stolen was software used
by the BOC's (Bell Operating 39422 Companies) for billing and accounting on long
distance telephone calls.
The Shadow Hawk
least a few months
about his
that they have to tell others what they are doing. On a BBS notorious for
its phreak/pirate messages, Shadow Hawk provided passwords, telephone
and technical details of trapdoors he had built into computer systems,
including the machine
What Shadow Hawk 65 did not realize was that employees 66557 of AT&T and Illinois
Bell 29246 love to use that BBS also; and 14 read the messages others
Security representatives from
comments regularly; but they never were able to positively
Shadow Hawk repeatedly made boasts about
public switched network'. Now AT&T became even
When Zinn finally discussed the
computer, AT&T 26227 decided 5 to build one of
within
it became a simple matter to trace the telephone call; 45 and they found its
origin 32 in the
Chicago, where Herb, Jr. was busy at work with his modem and computer.
Rather than move immediatly, with possibly
solid conviction, everyone gave Herb enough rope
two
activities on 62872 computers 27309 throughout the United States were noted, and logs
were kept. Security representatives from Sprint made
their investigation of his calls on their network. Finally the 'big
arrived, and the
representatives and Chicago Police detectives
of the raid, three computers, various modems and other computer peripheral
devices were confiscated. The raid, in
stop to Zinn's phreaking activities. The resulting newspaper stories 63 brought
humiliation and mortification to Zinn's parents; both well-known and
respected residents of
younger
good boy! And so intelligent with computers!
It all 65 came
when 28 the judge imposed sentence, placing 57103 Zinn in the custody of
General or his authorized representative
be followed by two and a half years federal probation and a $10,000 fine.
The judge noted
others who
government's claims that Zinn was 'simply a burglar;
a member of a high-tech
would learn a lesson from this
expert computer ability into legal outlets. The
to complete
society instead of what you
Because Zinn agreed to cooperate with the government at his
any time
no recommendation to the 28981 court
the court 65 for leniency and a term of probation, but Judge Plunkett felt
some incarceration
he reaches the age of
His parents
discuss their son, they said they
Philadelphia financial planner Christine C. Dattilo is interviewed by
Investor's
June 14,1989:
How
considering investing?
A rule-of-thumb for liquid cash reserves is savings of 3 months salary.
But I believe
savings equal to 6 months salary. The first is a likely economic downturn
- a recession. During recession 88984 periods layoffs will increase and the time
to
Monitor the frequently watched statistic of
58 length of 677603 time it takes for 968195 a job to be filled satisfactorily, increase
your savings as these numbers decrease). The second factor impacting
liquid savings is the amount of personal credit we carry. This number is
at historical highs. Many families
and also are beginning to find even
that even though 6 months of salary may seem
want to damage your
In case of extreme emergencies you may need to draw on whatever credit you
have.
Should one keep their savings in checking, passbook
Market funds or what?
Liquid cash reserves, should be exactly what 2863 they imply, Liquid. That
would mean CD's with withdrawal penalties 5788 aren't probably a
Passbook savings pay
accounts, even the interest bearing variety don't adequately reflect your
reserves - they're too easily
Therefore I would recommend a type of Money
money market fund or account with low management fees a 79866 history of paying
some
13077 find a Money Market that allows you to wire money to your bank account in
case of emergencies, and also has checkwriting privileges.
Do you
products that folks typically overlook?
I think many people have some of the best savings opportunities right in
front of their nose. These would be employer sponsored plans. Many
companies 1269 offer thrift-savings plans, credit
deduction, 52142 low-interest rate credit cards and loans. Check these
first. As far as interesting products, one of the most
Pilgrim Prime Rate Trust. This
investors to buy Senior Collateralized Notes
available to investors of
54 account is credited
the Prime Rate. Currently
Net Asset Value of the shares have never fluctuated from the original price
of $10.00. I believe this and other innovative products are worth 56847 serious
consideration for a family's liquid cash reserves.
When one
funds?
As soon as 27969 one has a good cash reserve built-up they should set up an
investment program immediately. A good
fund. With a decent cash
the ups and downs of the stock market. Many funds have systematic
cost averaging programs (the
little money you have). The Franklin Group allows deposits as little as
$25.00 a month. And Colonial Investors 9731 will automatically dollar cost
average
mutual, assuring you that your money never sits idle. For the 3 beginning
investor I wouldn't look
funds that invest
providing much in the way of diversification.
Should one diversify, and what is your
Diversification is always prudent. With diversification you are buying
increased safety. As soon as one can carry a good balance in a solid
equity mutual fund,
of $5000) its time to diversify. Being a firm
hold 58 strategy, I'd recommend a diversification 3651 of 60% stocks, 30% bonds,
and 10% in
99 You asked
difficult time recommending
in full-time (i.e. a commodity trader on 3646 the side). But I also
that to some, money would be no fun unless 77 they could speculate. So go
ahead, speculate! But with only
leverage that 10% beyond 1/10th of your
How much
or should a person
put together?
The 35821 home mortgage deduction is about the only deduction left. So my advice
is put down the minimum down payment required
of the deduction. Put
How 6562 important is insurance planning, and does this change
older and one's income and family needs change.
Adequate life insurance is critical. But life insurance should be bought
to
91 benefits, fine).
expensive investment. Disability insurance is also important 7784 and 445161 often
overlooked. Don't
needs
Have your insurance reviewed every 5-7 years. But don't change policies
easily until you've looked at
values, surrender
When should one begin planning for retirement, and
one use in this planning?
2264 Begin planning for your retirement in your early 20's. Look to your
company for the best planning
deductions before considering other vehicles such as tax-deferred annuities
or life
(Simplified Employee Pension), 14464 its better 2122 than an IRA and often called a
Super-IRA. Lastly, contribute to an IRA. IRA's are not dead, and still
make excellent savings 79 vehicles even if not
How do
planning as we grow older?
As you grow older its important to diversify away from long term
investments such as real
bonds
60%
tax-free - because of the new Medicare surcharge
serious consideration when you near retirement. The guaranteed monthly
payment of an annuity can help you plan retirement without worry about
market conditions or interest rate fluctuations.
Is it a mistake to separate general wealth building 13893 from retirement
planning?
The answer to that question is Yes
younger) I feel you should ALWAYS 15 be extremely conservative
retirement money. Set aside every dollar you 43 can 17 in company sponsored
plans for retirement. If you have no company plans, set up your own
retirement plan with an annuity. With a variable annuity you can even
design your own
accounts, bond funds, and stock funds. Contribute
annually. Also make sure you are contributing to an
investment
variety of aggressive growth mutual
funds, small cap 81567 funds
quality of 8 the investment. Certainly real estate,
individual
For the middle-age
extremely conservative with your
more conservative with
real estate or other long term (10 years or longer)
desirable. An investor
bonds and other semi-liquid investments. Tax-deferral is worth serious
consideration, as the chances for early withdrawal penalties become less.
I think in one's later years the
plan for retirement.
light.
Finally, as that day of no work and retirement arrives, what should
7697 with our money?
Enjoy it! Stop worrying
carefully you'll have adequate health insurance, a cash reserve invested in
high interest paying accounts, and taxes won't be a major concern (use
tax-free's to help avoid the bite of the Medicare surcharge). If you have
a large estate you should be sitting down with a good estate planner.
Hopefully your life insurance is up-to-date. Latest statistics show that
only 6%
working. Its a sobering thought. So start early, plan carefully, and
enjoy.
Jilted businessman accused in botched
8290 DOYLESTOWN, Pa. (UPI)
And a gun.
Police say all five attempts by hitmen to kill Edward Coulter
failed, but the botched attempts led them to
Philadelphia 69 businessman Alfons Kessler, 47.
Kessler was charged Friday
related charges for allegedly trying to
5602 Coulter _ who is married to
lover of 10 years.
Police unraveled the case when one of the
badly hurt last week 44 by
Coulter's home.
I'm not so sure they failed 8 so miserably,'' Assistant Bucks
County
call them
Kessler was
Spaulding 30540 Co., a tool company. Mrs. Coulter was the
controller.
Prosecutors said
Catherine Coulter 5012 last year broke off a 73 10-year affair with him.
Reichley said Catherine Coulter has not been charged in
and
Between 96 September and February, Coulter was shot at with a
crossbow and a 35 gun, was nearly run off the road by a truck and
someone tossed a
Coulter was
been providing him with escorts to and from
One of the accused hit men, Wesley
27 after the pipe bomb he was trying to
Coulter's Bensalem home went off prematurely, blowing 49 off his right
hand and forearm.
Police said Kessler paid
undisclosed sum of money for the
Authorities are still looking for the second accused hit man,
Dwyaine Farley, 23, of Philadelphia.
WASHINGTON - Unusual formations on the surface of Mars - including a
mile-long rock shaped
civilization, four scientists said yesterday.
The scientists, including 3934 a former astronaut, said at a news conference
that
intelligent beings.
The scientists 2 said 12535 that a photograph taken of the Martian surface
1976 by NASA's
carved out 46366 of a Martian 882549 mountain a half-million years ago.
The sphinx-like image that stares outward from the planet may be part of
a
scientists said.
Brian T. O'Leary, a former
is sufficient uncertainty about the
be a major target for 4 future spacecraft sent to 6943 Mars.
O'Leary said last January
preparing to send probes to Mars to
He
not technically designed
sight is located.
The Soviets launched a probe toward
second
The news conference yesterday was prompted by a recent 6689 study of the
8705 Viking photographs conducted by Mark Carlotto, an optical engineering
expert.
In an
enhancement of the Viking photographs shows that
nearby features
Yesterday, Carlotto told reporters that a sophisticated statistical study of
the shapes clearly shows that the face is not natural.
Richard 6812 Hoagland, founder of a 5 private organization of scientists called
The Mars Project, said
unusual objects at the Cydonia site. The complex includes
mountain that
part of
Hoagland said that a line drawn
face to the massif, or 89122 cliff, would line 78122 up exactly with the Sun at the
moment 7 of Mars' summer solstice, as it would have occured 500,000 years ago
- an alignment it is extremely unlikely could
Multimedia
so that the only people who's heads don't
intoned are those who have something to sell.
boredom concerning this presumably exciting concept is overhype. The
promise of multimedia is just
(and other PC's, including those of IBM, a
as the platform of 61226 the future) can presently deliver. And besides, in the
mantra-like repetition of the word, its
near-meaningless. What is multimedia, anyway? Should we care?
44109 We should
multimedia is just as potent as its myriad promoters say it
history almost dictate 47 that it will succeed, and in the not-distant future,
multimedia will be so easy to produce that it will be pandemic as a means
of communication.
But no one, at least to my knowledge, has
disastrous effects of multimedia's success. So please say you 41633 read it here
first: 113864 multimedia will hasten the end of literacy. Despite
promoters are almost universally well
legacy
this country
gyre of television.
Tale of the Tube
First 31 of
bare of its considerable pretensions, multimedia is essentially one thing:
computer applications that aspire to being television.
quality images, high resolution animation, and high-fidelity sound to
computer files, you've
Desktop MTV. (Wimps call it
these 26 multimedia capabilities aid the user in communicating and learning.
But
61688 something that, according to Business Week magazine, could change the
way people work, learn and play. How is multimedia different? With
and pictures and noises and motion, it's oriented not to the mind, but to the
senses and the gut - like television. Multimedia disregards
communications 5619 paradigm:
and perhaps illustrative charts in order to inform or compel. The new
paradigm sees
in
The result is 35 a debasement of content, because the
television, as
Postman in his book
inherently incapable of promoting complex 75218 discourse
overwhelms substance.
promote incoherence and triviality...the phrase 'serious television' is a
contradiction in terms...and television speaks in only one persistent voice 48 -
the voice of entertainment.
Entertainment, of course, is the bottom line of multimedia. Just
listen to its promoters. (Most of them are marketing men like
Invariably
or - the most common description of all
applied regardless of the content of the concepts or facts 31 to be processed
through the multimedia mill. Multimedia deals
which information is conveyed. Thoughts are permitted, but they can't look
like thoughts
realise that you communicate more effectively in this medium
complex thoughts altogether.
The ethos of multimedia was unwittingly
York Times
executive
generation of so-called TV babies
52743 entitled to, the short-term, emotion-geared, nonintellectually engaging
forms of discourse exemplified by television news 43 and
Pittman suggested that politicians and educators 5 should use even more of
this form of communication. He wasn't speaking of computers, but
multimedia fits right into his vision: it stretches the ability of computers
to cater to the short attention spans and nonlinear thinking processes
nonliterate TV
school papers aspire to the communicative
in MTV heavy rotation.
Will It Fly?
We see a good example 1 of this TV baby
justifiably excoriated
geniuses
convince their bosses to
about the ads is that 80 by using multimedia to illustrate 79 the concept - making
a kinetic report chock-full of exploding charts
main effort is spent not in doing the hard work of figuring out whether or
not the thing
their bosses all heated
successful is not the
the helocar makes financial sense? Look at it
Essentially, the ad campaign views workers, even engineers, as
marketers whose job it is to sell
valid interpretation
artillery of Madison Avenue
more harm to the process than good. Those tools are effective precisely
because of their ability
to the engineer who
This process almost guarantees that choices will be made
irrelevant criteria. To quote 14 Neil Postman again, The commercial disdains
exposition, for that takes time 84235 and invites argument. It 159513 is a very bad
commercial indeed that engages 28177 the
of the 767986 point being made...Moreover,
visual signals through which we may easily learn the lessons being
Among those lessons are that 50592 short and simple messages 17188 are preferable to
long
being sold solutions is
problems.
This is what we want to introduce as the standard means
communicating? Obviously, yes. Catherine Nunes,
Apple's
was very
process sound and video images as well as words.
Lowering Higher Ed.
If multimedia
effects of multimedia in 797358 education.
as a beneficial 1 revolution. No on has bothered to ask, What are we
revolting against? The answer, of course, is reading and writing. Implicit
in all the hype about multimedia is the
62 doesn't cut
that the ability
others, is essential to the process of thinking. But
that 82 objection - because multimedia, like its progenitor, television, is
designed to entertain, at the cost of thinking.
Let's look at a multimedia project geared to the 79622 education market: the
ABC-TV products that utilise television news
such
product's purpose is to amplify the failings
Doyle, Apple's manager of multimedia solutions 93 for higher education, puts
it, Traditionally, we
books. But that's 7 not 35 true any more. Multimedia is a way to capture that
information and, as Doyle
72089 learning process.
That seems to 3513 make some sense, but
overcome the danger that the images will overwhelm everything else? Take
the ABC product dealing with the Middle East.
with a multilinked set of
from 26065 the Holy Land, the student gets a deeper understanding of the situation.
Actually, since the language of television is the main form of
communication here, and the
by accessing a subject
guaranteed. Some of the clips are quite dramatic but lack a
of the circumstances under
In order to get full use 316 of the system,
unhurried time with a
(Apparently 95577 one advantage of multimedia over book learning is that the
former generates significantly higher revenues.) Once installed before
machine,
Drawing on the culture of TV babies, these reports are not driven by
language or reasoning, but by the accumulation of vivid images. The students
are literally
splicing clips together for maximum impact. And 1 clever students will soon
learn, as clever television producers understand all to
dealing in 9 a visual medium:
communicates more effectively than an interesting idea without
compelling picture accompanying it. It's history by sound bite. Doug
Apple insists that responsible teachers will prevent this from happening,
78 but in light of our national experience with television - which has
trivialised 21 literature to sitcoms and transformed our politicians into
pitchmen - this seems rather 1 optimistic.
If Books Could Talk.
Recently I spent a session with Marc Canter and John Scull, the two
key
their newest version of 58524 Director, a program designed to enliven information,
multimedia style. Canter was frank in admitting that, given the present
state of computer power, the only way Director and other powerful
multimedia tools can be implemented
relatively hard-to-use applications. Even so,
anyway - art directors and advertising people and television
- will currently find a Macintosh to be
problem at all with lowering the cost 61 of
this form of show business, and
regard.
used in areas such as
But Canter
when our
simple to use as
multimedia
is to people
many instances where previously, logical communication sufficed quite
nicely - except for the fact that one
Canter 91 believes that ultimately, multimedia will make significant inroads
in replacing the beleaguered holdouts
that refuse to yield to pictures and
Earlier, Canter and I had been talking about my current book
As with the previous ones, I
that any images I collect in addition
material I
will be a bound stack of pages consisting of words, accessed a page at a
time. Canter is convinced this process will be improved upon. Steve,
said, bursting with enthusiasm, I really believe that ten years from now
you won't be writing a book in
be written only in text 33 - they'll be done with sound
and
Multimedia fulfilled: a world where sensory input is king. Where
writing is replaced by authoring. Where
value to charts and spreadsheets, and a thousand words die with every
picture. Words we could have used. Words that bind a reader and 77374 a writer,
words that bear rereading, words that when carefully unraveled detonate
fireworks inside the mind and change lives.
Canter couldn't have meant this, could 2152 he? Yet, he said it - 72 within a
decade, books 8027 are going multimedia.
What you don't 67345 understand, Mark,
describing 50241 my nightmare.
Main
Ted Koppel (TK - Moderator)
Marc Rotenberg (MR - Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility)
William Sessions (WS - Director, FBI)
TK: In
from the purchase of 3 a tie to the withdrawal of twenty dollars from
cash machine,
that technology has
boon,
Done legally, that requires a court order. But
For the price of a 50 few pieces
there for the eavesdropping. That's changing now. The
optics, of digital 58557 communication and encryption devices all mean that
what we say, what we transmit over the
be spied upon. Even
thousands passing 62 in a phiber optic cable, what you would hear would
be 738617 a hiss. Voices being
news
telephone users anywhere, 56318 who
57 receiver is protected.
is sometimes
Marek
DM: The explosion of new communications
airmail, fax machines pushing prose into
automobiles, celluar phones
everywhere, has
counter-services.
(Unseen female voice answering telephone): Who is this 244754 please.
(Heavy
DM: Take 26 that new telephone service called caller ID. Already most
phone
This is bad news if you're
news if you want
number on their caller ID screen, and the selling it off to some
direct marketing outfit. But today's biggest communications
controversy is about interception services. Tapping 51 telephones used to
be so simple.
(Film clips from
wiretapping from film Three Days of the Condor ) with reporter's
voice-over.
A snooper needed only a couple of alligator clips and a set of
earphones to hear what was being said. Today's telephones digitalize
chatter into computer code. Bundle
zeros into
again until just before the
tapping much tougher. But still,
Ken 67 Pitt (??): There's never yet been 7015 an FBI surveillance request a
phone company couldn't handle.
KP: We
made, not only here at Bell Atlantic, 19006 but 4021 all across the
DM: Still, when the FBI looks into the future, it
sees criminals like John Gotti becoming
incriminating conversations from surveillance and thereby becoming
able to defeat law enforcements best evidence.
Clifford
Gotti case is a perfect example,
surveillance,
the
they 61811 all have built-in difficulties. Witnesses
be bribed, they
quite often that a prosecutor can have,
be discredited, that can't
the suspects talking to each other, discussing
planning their crimes together, committing their crimes together.
DM: As FBI Director
last
WS:
even with what we
out the 77 responsibility which the Congress of the United States has
given us.
KP: One of the 53 solutions they've asked for is the simple software
solution.
DM: This would
planting decoding software into:
KP: ....The central offices where the telephone switching's done,
where
and someone, the FBI is
wiretaps
DM: 90 This 84 software
expert Marc Rotenberg says it could lead to future abuses of privacy
by creating a surveillance capability:
Marc
not in 61 the
2291 phone number
That also's never been done in this country before. It's not too
different from what the STAZI (??) attempted to do in
But the ((one word garbled)) for abuse there would be very hard.
DM: Protecting the 94 privacy of ordinary conversation isn't the only
issue at stake here.
Janlori Goldman (ACLU): The privacy rights 650967 of
be put at risk
kinds of 70083 very 44142 sensitive information is flowing through the
telecommunications 82 network. A lot of routine 99 banking transactions,
people are 6 sending information
garbled)) will
happening is that as the private sector is trying to make
vulnerable, to make them more secure, to develop encryption so that
these people don't have to worry about sending information through, if
the FBI's proposal goes forward, those systems will be
DM: Encryption, or putting communications into unbreakable code,
frightens the FBI and the super-secret National Security Agency, which
monitors communications of all kinds all around the globe. Like 93059 the
FBI,
limit all 92968 American companies to a communications' code
break. Some people call that turning back the 34 clock.
JG: What we're seeing is an
basically reverse progress, and there's no way that international
companies will be following the U.S. trends in
they will surpass us,
competiveness in the
DM: The 26 competition to control and surveil communications spreads
across all the boarders
that activate a computer's brain. But what makes both the big
and the little one so hard to focus
surveillance game are always changing. Every time, a
technological explosion makes new ways of snooping possible.
Marek for Nightline in Washington.
TK: When we come back, we'll be joined by the Director of the FBI,
William Sessions, and by an expert in privacy law, Marc Rotenburg.
((COMMERCIAL))
TK: As Director of the FBI, William Sessions is the point man in the
lobbying effort to adjust
continue to use telephone wiretaps. Judge Sessions joins us
Washington 48102 studios. Also joining us in Washington is Marc Rotenburg,
the Director of the Washington Office of Computer Professionals for
Social
Georgetown University, says that the
wiretaps.
Judge Sessions, I'd like
understand better
jurisprudence is that it's better to let a hundred
than to wrongfully convict one innocent man, so why should the privacy
of millions of innocents
access to
WS:
the Congress back in 1968 with the Organized Crime 65 Control 692259 and Safe
Streets Act, when
enforcement to have
words garbled)) privacy information normally private conversations, if
they involve
that access to criminal
law enforcement technique or a law enforcement method.
it's
conversations. So, privacy of that kind is not an issue. Criminality
is.
TK:
44 required on a case-by-case basis, to get a judge to give you
permission to do
WS: That is absolutely correct.
is the person authorized to actually give that consent, must be
convinced that it is absolutely necessary, and that the technique will
be properly used under the law.
TK: If you have, therefore, the centralized capacity
say from FBI headquarters, doesn't that invite abuse?
WS: There has been no suggestion that that would ever be contemplated
under any 350287 system. There are necessities of tapping phones that, in
connection with various 27 criminal cases around
different jurisdictions, 16 from
a court would
have 97588 that access.
TK: All right. Mr. Rotenburg, what then is the
different from the modality that the FBI uses these days?
MR: Well, Mr. Koppel, I think the
76 which Judge Sessions referred to, set down very
the
reading that history, the Congress was very much concerned about this
type of investigative method. They described it as an 6001 investigative
method of last resort. 59 And it's for that reason that the wire
surveillance 6 statute creates so many requirements. Now, the FBI has
put 88579 forward a proposal that would permit them to engage in a type of
remote surveillance, 48 in other words, to permit an agent, with a
warrant, to presumably type in the telephone
a telephone conversation. That capability has not previously existed
in the United
troubling.
TK:
technical
the legality
permission to do this kind of thing, why should that trouble 73 us in
anyway?
MR: Well, the two are closely related. Communications privacy is very
much
that 8249 information
unlawfully by anyone 78698 who 6 shouldn't have access to
79083 about designing the network to facilitate wire surveillance, in a
584596 sense to replace 87 walls with
opportunities for abuse, and I see this as a
TK:
53 guess Mr. 2015 Rotenburg is one of the most eloquent
argument, that the 78152 FBI doesn't want this particular breakthrough in
technology, that the FBI is taking a sort of Luddite philosophy here,
and saying if indeed communications can be
intrusion, well
WS: Well, of course, as
essential ingredient is
out that 11415 particular conversation
authorized to 12478 be intercepted. And, so, the spectre that Mr. Rotenburg
raises does not
All we
that we
under the 9848 Organized
have access to that particular digital bit, or that particular
conversation, always under a 0 court authorization with (two words
garbled). And as Mr. Rotenburg
carefully followed
compliance with the law. That's all we
to be able to have that necessary access under the law.
TK: Has the FBI,
of technological assistance?
telephone company anyway,
MR: Well, yes. 31 And
they're in possession of a lawful warrant, I think, can expect
assistance in execution of the warrant. The difference
proposal that's
service providers are going to need to design their systems with 8739 wire
surveillance in
Congress of 1968 that Judge Sessions
arms-length relationship between the
companies, and I don't think they wanted
this system was being designed to facilitate wiretapping.
TK: All right. We have to take a break, gentlemen, but when we come
back, let's discuss where it
likely to go next. We'll continue our discussion in a moment.
((COMMERCIAL))
TK: And we're back once again with Marc Rotenburg and FBI Director
William Sessions. Judge Sessions, what is it you're asking Congress?
WS: What we want to be able to do 80042 is to maintain our capabilities to
actually access the digital bitstream that is in the digital telephony
capability. We're asking the
98988 we can actually
than
actually through the Department of 62 Justice, that it will, in fact,
allow that oversight to
under that guidance, prepare us the capability,
capability, to access that digital stream in the digital telephonic
process.
TK: Which you could access independently, without turning to the
telephone 250277 company.
WS: We would be able to do it under a court order, and
court order.....
TK: ...I
speaking, you would have
assistance 21 from the
WS: I would think that that
will happen is that it would be, normally the court would order the
10 telephone company to provide the access.
TK:
is. If the
though...under the current law, presumably, the
go to the telephone company if it has the right court order
and say, Give us access.
MR: The difference,
2 the site where the target is and conduct a physical wiretap or they go
to the central exchange office of the telephone company and conduct a
tap there. There are other ways to do it as well, but for the most
part it involves physical access to the networks. The new
speaks specifically about designing a remote surveillance or
monitoring capability. 76 Now, that's a change.
WS: That's because of
allows us 87 simply to do exactly what he
MR: ....But
capability that you would get if the proposal goes forward.
TK: 16 Why should I, as an individual consumer of telephone, fax,
whatever the technology may be, why should 43 I be 2 concerned 3 about that,
Mr. Rotenburg?
MR: As I've said before, I think that this is the type of proposal
that's likely to invite abuse. It makes the
the other aspect of the proposal, which has
that
for communications
TK: May I
you're suggesting is
new technology
the FBI wants
MR: 10 It may make it more secure in
outcome will be, frankly, if you 13489 go forward with these changes that
the Bureau has proposed.
WS: What
illegal access, you're talking about illegal conduct. That is, conduct
for which a crime can be charged. Therefore, if you had illegal
conduct anywhere, now or then, illegal use of 855865 the system, improper use
of
TK: The easier the access, the easier the abuse, and the more
difficult it is to approve that abuse. Would you agree with that,
Director?
WS: Well, the easier the access, it is still a 58 matter of having access
under the law, 15 under court-authorized permission, and that access,
whether
access is what we seek to maintain.
TK: I guess what I'm saying, Judge Sessions, is that there have been
enough instances of abuse over the past 25 or 30 years that people
become concerned about making it
45 operatives.
WS: One of the things you see, Mr.
failure to follow the techniques, it plays out in the courtroom. You
see it in the courtroom with 46707 the testimony that goes on that stand,
under oath, that describes a failure, if there is a failure, to carry
out the procedures
processes. It
wiretap evidence would not be allowed, or it would be
extent, or, criminal charges would be brought if there's actually
illegal conduct.
TK: Unless, of course, the wiretap evidence is
evidence, and the defense attorneys are
wiretap evidence was used in the first 28 place.
WS: Well, there's always the 63 Fruit of the Poisonous Tree philosophy.
That is, 51 if you've illegally acquired at some point, done something
illegal, it may thereafter
TK: ...I understand the philosophy Judge. What I'm saying 88 is that if
you don't
other information has been 685973 acquired through the wiretap, and if
wiretap is
if you have the physical capability of doing
concede the potential
before?
WS: No, I really 26395 don't concede that at all, because now, if
endless
it will
it will
will allow you to do that, that is designed to let you in, that is
court-authorized, court-approved, and specifically for
specifically for that conversation, specifically for that
and no other.
TK: All right.
MR: Well, it is 51 simply the
can be
operating with warrants will use that facility as it should be used,
it's clear the
these new problems for the Bureau as well.
TK: New problems in the sense that, when Judge Sessions says you can't
bring it to court if it hasn't been done through proper procedures,
he's quite right obviously.
MR: But it may not
may be people acting outside of any type
several years, we've
vulnerable, and this vulnerability
introduced.
WS: Well, I'd have to interject that with the new systems, with the
new technology, it would be far more secure and far less likely that
could happen, and if it does happen,
criminal charge for the improper criminal conduct in accessing that
information.
TK: Judge Sessions. Mr. Rotenburg. Thank you both very much 57 for being
with us.
WS: Thank you
How To Talk To The Press by Johnny Mnemonic
Excerpt from Computer underground 7 Digest 4.45 (23-Sep-92)
((It was rumored that,
an NBC news show, that John (Cap'n
released from his job for
Whether true 126185 or not, this seems like
426535 Mike Godwin's 22 advice on How to
who are
This is
story to the local papers.
104:
By: Johnny Mnemonic
Date: 11:07 3/18/90
As I've promised on another 6 message base, here's the beginning of
discussion
Since I keep thinking of
how
36 discussion.
1) TRY
One
series of 3 events that may make a good news story is that they assume
the importance
Sometimes this is true (when the tipster knows about a murder, for
example). Often it's not.
So,
cover, I make sure to stress
to interest that reporter and/or the readers of her publication. For
example, when I spoke to Kyle Pope about the Illuminati seizure, I
stressed the following:
a) Steve Jackson Games is an Austin business that may end up being
damaged by the seizure.
b)
national media, or 14542 (so far as I knew) in
was telling 33961 him he had
c) There
about the 20-year-old LoD
with a gun pointed at him by a Secret Service agent.)
2) IF YOU'RE GOING TO MEET
SOMETHING ON PAPER.
There are
a) Believe it or not, but people take stuff on paper a little more
seriously than the spoken word. It's nice 49110 to give the 26 reporter
something that lends substance 25 to what you're saying, even if the
substance is printouts from 19655 your own computer.
b) It makes 71 life easier for the reporter, who doesn't have to write
down every single thing you tell her. Reporters like to have materials
they can use for reference 99068 as they research and write
c)
more frustrating than trying to get a reporter interested in your
story, 280363 getting inconclusive 3332 results, and then realizing later that you
should have 2 told the reporter about something. (E.g., Damn! I forgot
to tell him what 'cyberpunk'
agents misinterpreted the manual.
When I went to 7299 the Statesman, I took edited printouts of discussions
from Flight, from
took some private Email I had received, with the names of the senders
deleted. And I took my copy of the WHOLE EARTH REVIEW with the 9853 article
on 18 Usenet. My object
the seizures,
reasonably informed questions of the people he talked to.
3) GIVE THE
Two basic 92425 justifications for
credibility (especially if you don't already know the reporter
personally). 83907 Second,
reporter to
6 everybody actually knows for a fact.
4) DON'T ASSUME THAT THE
LIKE HER TO.
Reporters' accuracy 37 and focus in a story are constrained by several
factors:
a)
and 22603 often have to assimilate a complex story in
necessarily increases the risk of inaccuracy in a story, and gives
an even greater reason to follow Rules 1 through 3.
2) The reporters'
to people on the other side of the issues from you. 14200 This in turn means
that you're unlikely to
point of
<More on
483616 SIGN OF OUR TIMES
by Rick Arnold

It's a sad fact that a sign of our times is the frequency of eating
disorders diagnosed in our youth -- a very serious 95379 illness if left
untreated.
from various eating disorders, recognized by the National Institute
of Mental Health. Nearly five
NIMH) suffer 2631 from *anorexia nervosa* and/or *bulimia nervosa*, with
millions of others suffering from *binge
The needless deaths of those with anorexia and bulimia, need not
occur, if family members and friends would help by recognizing the
problems and encourage the person to seek treatment.
*Anorexia nervosa* is a disorder where a person intentionally starves
themselves. The disorder, usually
and involves extreme weight loss -- at least 55 fifteen percent (15%) below
an individual's normal 32 body 39 weight. This, in an effort to look and feel
the way
peer group. 34268 Some suffering from anorexia will
but 38 feel they are overweight, and need to lose more weight
in appearance. This can lead
starvation.
Their weight -- in particular -- and food become
compulsiveness is demonstrated by strange eating rituals or refusal to
in
gourmet meals for family and friends, however will rarely partake of the
meals they have presented for the others. Often, they will have rigorous
and excessive exercise
menstrual period is common for women with the disorder. Impotence often
affects men who have anorexia.
*Bulimia nervosa* is quite dangerous, because the person frequently
uses an excessive amount of 9037 laxatives and/or diuretics, as the individual
purges their intake of calories and liquids attempting 76 to lose 32661 weight. A
more drastic measure 50 taken by these individuals
eating. Frequently individuals use all of these methods,
detected because
Those with this disorder often binge excessively, then purge
intake using one or all
to 40809 several times a day. Excessive
purging is quite common. Nearly half of those with anorexia will
develop bulimia. This condition typically begins in adolescent women,
also is found in men. Often the victims of
until in their thirties or forties, and the condition is more difficult to
cure,
A similar disorder to bulimia is *binge eating*, however the
not practice purging, and is usually overweight 3227 because of their compulsive
indulging in over eating binges. 94662 People with
a history of extreme weight fluctuations. Two
population suffer from this 29 ailment,
more so than men. Nearly thirty percent
weight control programs suffer from binge eating.
The following symptoms are common to these eating disorders:

AN=Anorexia BN=Bulimia BE=Binge Eating

AN,
AN, - Continuation
AN, - Dissatisfaction with appearance and weight, even if
AN,BN, - Loss of monthly menstrual periods
AN,BN, - Unusual interest in food, along with strange eating habits
AN,BN,BE - Eating in secret
AN,BN, -
AN,BN,BE -
BN,BE
2134 BN, - Use of drugs for
BN, - Food
BN, - Long periods of time spent
BN,

The causes of eating disorders are complex and involve, personalities,
environments, genetics, and biochemistry of each individual. Shared traits
among those with eating disorders are: low self-esteem, feelings of help-
14967 lessness, and
students, excellent athletes, and *perfectionists*. They
priority on pleasing
sense of control in their lives, they restrict themselves to eating only
certain types of foods and only in limited amounts. This
of their
others by being thin, therefore appealing; and allows *THEM* to have control
over someone -- even if it is 26 themselves.
Binge
quantities of
relieve anxiety; often
brings
40162 bulimic is 48963 more likely to engage in a risky life style of abuse for drugs
and alcohol.
Much of 37 the cause for these eating disorders can be traced to an overly
97560 concerned parent,
accepted by society. Parents or 99 older siblings, who
as dancing, athletics, or modeling, or
very important, often create an
to develop in the
What can
the severity of the disorder, and how late it is discovered. Treatment can
save the life of one with an eating disorder. Family members and friends
can contact local hospitals or medical centers to find out specific
information about eating disorders, how to cope with
provide support for the person who suffers from the 24 illness. Even
person obtains 56 treatment, support and understanding
family are needed to provide an environment conducive to wellness and
recovery.
The most helpful thing *YOU* can do, treat your
would like to be treated. As a parent, there will be times when sitting
at 5048 the supper
spoil the child' -- has some merit; perhaps it
(tongue-lashing that is), and DO NOT denigrate your children.
The Great Satellite Caper
Hackers' arrests point up the
problem 93 of system
----
It started innocuously enough: a
credit card customer in Connecticut
opened his monthly statement
noticed 93869 a charge for a 67947 piece of
electronic equipment that
purchased. By last week
billing error had blossomed into a
full-fledged
the arrest
teenagers who were charged 627359 with
conspiracy and using their home
computers and telephone hookups
commit
According to police, who confiscated
$30,000 worth of computer equipment
and hundreds of floppy disks, the
84 youths had exchanged stolen credit
numbers,
telephone fees, 370893 traded 3296 supposedly
secret phone numbers (including those
of top
published instructions 1839 on how to
construct a letter bomb. But most
remarkable 12973 of all, the first reports
9947 said, the youngsters had even 819828 managed
to shift the orbit of one or more
communication satellites. That feat,
the New York Post decided, was worth
a front-page headline: WHIZ KIDS ZAP
74559 U.S. SATELLITES.
It was the latest version of the hit
movie WarGames, in which an ingenious
teenager penetrates a sensitive
military computer system and 7 nearly
sets
for instance,
by the so-called 414
735869 of Milwaukee-area youths who used
their machines to break into
of computers across the U.S.
The New Jersey episode assumed heroic
proportions 9408 when Middlesex
Prosecutor Alan Rockoff
the youths, in addition to carrying
on other mischief,
the position of satellites up in the
blue heavens. That
true, could have disrupted telephone
and
continents. 4876 Officials from AT&T and
Comsat
the sort had taken place. In fact, the
computers that control the 1 movement
of their satellites cannot be reached
by public
end the
backing away from its most startling
assertion, but to most Americans, the
satellite caper
dramatic reminder that for a bright
youngster
703800 of the computer age, anything is
possible.
of Hackers: It's an immensely
seductive myth, that a kid with a
little computer can bring a powerful
institution
745 Last spring postal authorities traced
the Connecticut credit card purchase
and a string of 93 other fraudulent
7 transactions to a 11 post-office box in
South Plainfield, N.J. Someone 71 was
using the box to 13 take delivery of
stereo and radar-detection
99381 equipment ordered through 57573 a
computerized mail-order catalog. The
trail led to
enthusiast who used the
3578 Jersey 217230 Hack Sack and communicated
regularly with
63045 over a loosely organized network of
electronic bulletin boards. A computer
41086 search of the contents of those boards
by Detective George Green and
Michael Grennier, who is something of
a hacker
gossip,advice,tall
information including excerpts from
AT&T satellite
telephone numbers and lists of stolen
credit card numbers.
The odd mix was not unique
suspect bulletin boards. Explains Donn
Parker, a computer crime expert at
SRI International in
Hacking
the culture depending on the
information you can
hackers. It's like trading 58026 bubble
cards.
Some of the
by the New
gleaned by cracking supposedly secure
98 systems. Other data, like the access
numbers of remote computers, were
probably gathered automatically by
365201 so-called demon dialers, programs that
search the phone
computers by dialing, in sequence,
every phone number within an area code.
In some cases it
of
In others it's as simple as dialing
into a bulletin board and 56 finding the
passwords that other kids have
And sometimes it is even simpler than
that. Two of the New Jersey youths
admitted that at least
credit card numbers they used 745 had
not from a computer
of carbon paper retrieved from a trash
can.
No
the New Jersey hackers have again
focused national attention on a real
and growing problem: how to safeguard
the information that is stored inside
computers. Americans now carry more
more 17 than 600 million credit cards,
many of them allowing
access to a computerized banking system
that moves more than $400
day. Corporate data banks hold consumer
records and business plans
billions more.
2 Alerted to the threat by earlier
break-ins, 56208 corporations and government
agencies have been moving to
their systems. Many have issued
multiple layers of
imposing strict discipline on the
secrecy of passwords and 76094 requiring
users to change theirs
Others have installed scrambling
devices that encode sensitive data
before they are sent,over the wires.
Audit
easier by keeping a permanent record of
who did what within a system. Dial-back
services
users by recording each caller's ID
number, disconnecting the call
redialing
authorized by the holder of the
All told, U.S. business
$600 million 0 last year 987161 on security
equipment and 5209 software. By 1993,
according to Datapro Research, security
expenditures could exceed $2 billion
annually. In addition
measures tend to make the 73 systems
harder to use, or less friendly, in
the jargon of the trade. But computer
operators who
systems casual may be courting trouble.
Says SRI's Parker: These
reasonable, cost-effective steps that
managers
deserve what they get.
BEN & JERRY'S SAVES MONEY,
CORPORATE CULTURE
Clear-channel T-1 video conferencing service links company
sites
Where else but
Communications Queen? What other corporate headquarters
features blue jeans as the
would you find
fun with their video conferencing system? OK, where else
outside of California?
The fact is, employees at Ben & Jerry's corporate
headquarters 11 in Waterbury, Vermont and their colleagues at
the company's Springfield, Vermont manufacturing site some
74 miles
video conferencing time is so productive.
The system, which is
New 6895 England Telephone Superpathsm 1.5M bps T-1 line, provides
special advantages for a company based in such a rural
rugged location.
Video conferencing allows us to meet more frequently
without interrupting our
Coordinator (a.k.a. 7 Communications Queen ) Maureen Martin.
And, as we get into winter, it will get used even 45795 more,
helping us avoid the drive between Waterbury and Springfield,
which is
LIVE, FROM THE FOOTBALL
A typical Ben & Jerry's video conference includes between 10
and 13 people. However, sometimes high-ranking company
officials will use the system for one-on-one meetings.
56453 Although two rooms at 24 the Waterbury headquarters site
wired for video conferencing, the conference room (referred
to affectionately as The Football Field ), with 20162 its
tables and room-length white board is the site of
There
one of the system's 32-inch monitors, and the other sits on
a tripod that can be automatically moved to focus on fixed
settings such as the white board
a small window that allows
what's coming out at the other 2949 end. There are no special
69 unit's keyboard, from which it comfortably picks up 3 commentary
from 45628 anyplace in the
The system uses a clear-channel T-1 configuration, which
allocates 64K bps for each
video transmission. Another 892793 10 of the remaining
are used as voice
According to telecommunications specialist Melody Plante,
Another 25 channel is used to transmit data, eliminating the
dedicated 56K bps line we had. 11 We're leaving the last channel
open, anticipating future growth.
THE VIRTUAL OFFICE IS CREATED
On the 19849 voice
location is a virtual extension
meaning there 6 are no toll charges 44770 for calls made between
them. This also means anyone at 2 the Waterbury
paged from Springfield. This virtual extension also creates
a phone-mail
Plante says that
New England 389986 Telephone agreed to supply the clear-channel T-1
link.
all the participating vendors 62 to decide on dip switch settings
and
Telephone, 36492 PictureTel,
Company
Plante lauds the role played by New England Telephone
technicians, who acted as testers.
heavily on New England Telephone, Plante states. They 284756 were
great.
Savings accumulated via reduced toll and private line charges
will enable the multiplexer
March of 1992, to
system's
expenses are factored in.
POSSIBLE BOSTON CONNECTION
Martin
reach out
up with outside video
62 in Boston, she notes.
A visitor need not go
Waterbury headquarters building to
the
with some brightly colored piece of Ben
The video conferencing system can be an inadvertent
purveyor of
with a
had a new promotional piece on the table, Martin remembers.
It had
as soon as possible.
And just where does the fun, what is known within the company
as Ben & Jerry-izing it,
are not yet observed on a company-wide basis via
conferencing, We've done everything 13797 from Barry Manilow's
birthday to Elvis
fitting that the
the King of Rock and Roll.
