automobiles, celluar phones
BLOODS/CRIPS ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT PROPOSAL
WS: No, I really 26395 don't concede that at all, because now, if
worried
426535 Mike Godwin's 22 advice on How to
describing 50241 my nightmare.
The Europeans tend
for which a crime can be charged. Therefore, if you had illegal
of the 767986 point being made...Moreover,
millions of others suffering from *binge
by unauthorized
billions more.
about the 20-year-old LoD
It's a sad fact that a sign of our times is the frequency of eating
reasonable, cost-effective steps that
How To Talk To The Press by Johnny Mnemonic
simple to use as
connection with various 27 criminal cases around
SRI International in
idealistic and non-materialistic they are. These guys are pretty sharp
again until just before the
passwords for several computers in the area, etc. Unlike what
1988 that they had arrested a group of computer hackers who used overseas
resting place, the dish points directly at the satellite Galaxy
telephone company's
and also are beginning to find even
excesses, not all hackers are
WS: One of the things you see, Mr.
full-fledged
an investigation in November after a customer reported that there were
you've read enough
the offices of Michigan Bell. He also made some 729 friends within Bell.
communicates more effectively than an interesting idea without
bulletin board, he said. We simply
Date: 11:07 3/18/90
will enable the multiplexer
gives us sysops a bad name!
Adequate life insurance is critical. But life insurance should be bought
said. We have
frontier justice. And some
Drawing on the culture of TV babies, these reports are not driven by
news if you want
off, I really didn't know
$30,000 for teachers and re-elections
By the time he went to the federal court on July 22
actually access the digital bitstream that is in the digital telephony
says Paul D.
Congress of 1968 that Judge Sessions
whatever the technology may be, why should 43 I be 2 concerned 3 about that,
and
in appearance. This can lead
surveillance 6 statute creates so many requirements. Now, the FBI has
many instances where previously, logical communication sufficed quite
was very
tap there. There are other ways to do it as well, but for the most
When should one begin planning for retirement, and
All schools shall have new landscaping and more plants and

unlawfully by anyone 78698 who 6 shouldn't have access to
745 Last spring postal authorities traced
and teenagers with various counts of 61361 computer abuse and wire fraud.
of carbon paper retrieved from a trash
In fact, Maxfield's career as a counterhacker began quite innocently, in
A rule-of-thumb for liquid cash reserves is savings of 3 months salary.
a year earlier. Now approaching the age of 50, he is still chasing hackers,
different jurisdictions, 16 from
hardware and software from a texas SF
an individual's normal 32 body 39 weight. This, in an effort to look and feel
than
he
students, excellent athletes, and *perfectionists*. They
((COMMERCIAL))
Hackers are personal-computer enthusiasts, often in their teens,
12 months 78241 and cost $30,000 to $40,000. During
HBO's as soon as I hit the transmit button,
convinced that it is absolutely necessary, and that the technique will
According to MacDougall, Gentile then
leader.'
We can't 600781 discuss it here, said Gentile. We can talk about it in front of
and
were also plans to set up a pirate TV station and broadcast in a narrow
at the bureau had kept their mouths shut and not underestimated the
problem at all with lowering the cost 61 of
DM: Take 26 that new telephone service called caller ID. Already most
subcultures and sub-groups are moving in, and in a while
Whilst groups in
no recommendation to the 28981 court
landscape. But like the real pioneers who first explored the American
multimedia style. Canter was frank in admitting that, given the present
WAS IT WORTH IT?
considering investing?
The Shadow Hawk
56453 Although two rooms at 24 the Waterbury headquarters site
the
do that. We pinpoint the large dollar
with a gun pointed at him by a Secret Service agent.)
What can Maxfield do for them? If a corporation's phone system is abused
<More on
among those with eating disorders are: low self-esteem, feelings of help-
technological explosion makes new ways of snooping possible.
plans for retirement. If you have no company plans, set up your own
The firm, 96 in the Wilson Building on Broadway, used its
Maxfield accepted. The arrangement gave him what every hacker and phone
tried to
first: 113864 multimedia will hasten the end of literacy. Despite
Cornwall, author of
him to have done
have 97588 that access.
provide aggressive
the precisely calibrated tones that
Reichley said Catherine Coulter has not been charged in
99381 equipment ordered through 57573 a
earphones to hear what was being said. Today's telephones digitalize
phone booth just off Interstate 75 in Gainesville, Florida. The tourist
into the same system over and over, and companies that wish to prosecute must
and modern teaching methods. Psychological testing will also be
Attorney Lawrence Gentile III, who served MacDougall with a subpoena to appear
Feds claim expertise
41086 search of the contents of those boards
institution
to tell him what 'cyberpunk'
indicted under the law.
1978, when
Cable Pair was a
the legality
society is moving into electronic networking and
pass through their systems.
b)
He can also tell them where their system is vulnerable and what to do about
One hacker's specialty was getting into Arpanet, the advanced research
Assistant United States Attorney William Cook
help them to achieve particular frequencies and 64 corresponding mental
if their employees didn't
online capers. Even if he wanted to quit the business, he
the phone system needs
Toll-call fraud is nothing new. Since the 1960's, for
Plante says that
complete the call. 19 That makes it harder to track the caller.
4631 monitor for a while, and then
identification of all areas of concern. ..
All pavements/sidewalks in Los 1183 Angeles are
The
They (the EFF) would lead you
family are needed to provide an environment conducive to wellness and
menstrual period is common for women with the disorder. Impotence often
forms of discourse exemplified by television news 43 and
from 26065 the Holy Land, the student gets a deeper understanding of the situation.
school.
high interest paying accounts, and taxes won't be a major concern (use
minutes. Caught up with engineering curiosity, he monitored power levels and
necessary to ask a few pertinent questions about 1 what's going down in
you
criminal charge for the improper criminal conduct in accessing that
must think of
that the ability
US hackers
they're in possession of a lawful warrant, I think, can expect
took some private Email I had received, with the names of the senders
In order to get full use 316 of the system,
mountain that
We see a good example 1 of this TV baby
use the word 'cyberpunk' as
What Shadow Hawk 65 did not realize was that employees 66557 of AT&T and Illinois
crisis. More recently, confidence has picked 12 up and the 23 last two annual
criminals, lawyers, politicians, 8086 bikers,
accepted by society. Parents or 99 older siblings, who
On July 27, in the
tenths [percent] of the people don't agree.
York Times and The Washington
the local FBI office in 1982.
wants to show 2540 how good
communication satellites. That feat,
others, is essential to the process of thinking. But
4 uniforms, and a guy says, 'Hey, what are you in for? And I say, 'Oh,
permission to do
Comsat
Multimedia
you won't be writing a book in
picture. Words we could have used. Words that bind a reader and 77374 a writer,
also is found in men. Often the victims of
blue heavens. That
Two basic 92425 justifications for
have
numbers and passwords by spying on executives using pay phones.
In the eyes of
patroled 21606 by individuals
Hoagland said that a line drawn
that moves more than $400
sources today.
TK:
FUN EDUCATION
hell of it, or an employee being vindictive, then the corporate community
limit all 92968 American companies to a communications' code
DM: Protecting the 94 privacy of ordinary conversation isn't the only
this.
their systems. Many have issued
Secret Service agent Adams disputed the notion that federal
feudalism,
dealers, who use PBXs to place hard-to-trace calls. Others are
I was 21 wrong, and
a spy novel role as a warrior fighting 79 battles that both sides will deny ever
TK: All right.
Dwyaine Farley, 23, of Philadelphia.
which is
who think that John MacDougall is a wonderful man and a great hero who has
garbled)) will
for most
records and business plans
Martin
great.
with us.
members of the Inner Circle, a nationwide
Canter 91 believes that ultimately, multimedia will make significant inroads
old
investigative division
overlooked. Don't
adults that
large satellite dishes.
pirated information
with a
dealing in 9 a visual medium:
62 in Boston, she notes.
momentarily with just 33221 a
so that the only people who's heads don't
translation
desirable. An investor
Attorney for what? questioned MacDougall. I haven't done anything. An
Most of
compelling picture accompanying it. It's history by sound bite. Doug
neighborhood clean-up week wherein all residents 36 will be responsible
Enjoy it! Stop worrying
the Los Angeles School Board, every four years.
attorney, showed that the information which BellSouth alleged was
67 name Captain Midnight, he
everything
You can't just plead guilty
and Bruce Sterling, dismissing it as a fashion thing. Whilst
County
The most helpful thing *YOU* can do, treat your
former generates significantly higher revenues.) Once installed before
TK:
that
The
Philadelphia financial planner Christine C. Dattilo is interviewed by
Still, the FCC
Captain Midnight. That's when I hit it, he 2235 says. It was almost like
Cyberpunks, who are
threat to the national security. There's lots
dedicated 56K bps line we had. 11 We're leaving the last channel
didn't know what to do.
fun with their video conferencing system? OK, where else
they will surpass us,
In others it's as simple as dialing
865288 The LAUSD will provide up-to-date books to the neglected areas and
gained free phonecalls with gadgets like Blue Boxes and touch 16 pads).
MacDougall had stopped advertising and turned off his air-conditioner to save
comsuming passion for telephones and computers. During the summer he worked
minority researchers and
In some cases it
DM: As FBI Director
- an alignment it is extremely unlikely could
Captain Midnight.
the FBI wants
3. Additionally,
companies 1269 offer thrift-savings plans, credit
MR: ....But
arrived, and the
the New Jersey hackers have again
Investor's
the other aspect of the proposal, which has
illegal access, you're talking about illegal conduct. That is, conduct
surveillance,
scanning the horizon, electron gun across his
features blue jeans as the
transponder. But then, as suddenly as he had struck, he quit. When I shut it
and dismay as
MR: 10 It may make it more secure in
heavily on New England Telephone, Plante states. They 284756 were
In these after-school 83156 tutorial
One way to get to the
15888 phreak would love to have...a license to hack. He
conference call that hooked up Hamburg, New York, the Electronic 12277 Cafe in
foundation wants to educate
According to law-enforcement
((COMMERCIAL))
Captain Midnight. The FBI was
expertise we wouldn't be as
Since I keep thinking of
DM: 90 This 84 software
Coulter's home.
Clear-channel T-1 video conferencing service links company
office one August evening in 1983 must have thought they were in heaven.
September, a crowd gathered outside his office,
Postman in his book
consideration for a family's liquid cash reserves.
possibilities of
noticed 93869 a charge for a 67947 piece of
about 6000 suspected hackers and phone
monitoring capability. 76 Now, that's a change.
controller.
residents 98787 of 32952 the houses allegedly had used to 945340 gain access to Dial
Two weeks later, the
But I believe
difficult it is to approve that abuse. Would you agree with that,
worry. I was
conduct anywhere, now or then, illegal use of 855865 the system, improper use
civil liberties fellow travellers are an interest 6 group like any other.
suspect him. The investigation had been narrowed down to uplink stations with
72089 learning process.
helped to
This is
distance telephone calls.
companies of the world. As in the UK, the Germans have
breed. In the end the thing about American hackers that'll
resisted the investigators' efforts.
(basically an EEG machine which displays a user's
law enforcement technique or a law enforcement method.
Then he saw that Captain Midnight's HBO ambush was making 13 TV's network
WS: I would think that that
to the engineer who
money. With no customers, he idled away 408275 the day watching TV
3957 from two 14988 homes in Cherry Hill and one in Voorhees Township as part of
Clifford
Communications Fraud Control Assn., 419807 a group of phone companies
the same channel,
Naturally curious, Maxfield experimented with his telephone 50 at
Whether true 126185 or not, this seems like
44109 We should
chatter into computer code. Bundle
the voice of entertainment.
issue. That's not a heck of a lot different
of their
problem 93 of system
subjects...will 63232 be
A special taks force shall be assigned to focus on the clean-up
But no one, at least to my knowledge, has
irresponsible elements 2 within the digital underground, perhaps because
Chicago
specifically for that conversation, specifically for that
released from prison.
I didn't sleep very well.
Following the success of his 1983 office party and the resulting raids,
LIKE HER TO.
adds, I would
for instance,
By the
network that
Will It Fly?
reasonably informed questions of the people he talked to.
face to the massif, or 89122 cliff, would line 78122 up exactly with the Sun at the
with a multilinked set of
Prosecutors dropped Neidorf's case when Sheldon Zenner, Neidorf's
many of them allowing
given us.
information.
via something like ESP or
first pay TV 80 service to scramble its signal full time. Other 42 services were
in Rimini last Summer, they organised lectures
Bell 29246 love to use that BBS also; and 14 read the messages others
who are
frightens the FBI and the super-secret National Security Agency, which
My phone
Should one keep their savings in checking, passbook
fraud. He also tracks the 9085 names and numbers of pirate BBS's--and it's 14 all at
they formerly thought of as the enemy.
keep the hackers out, but it's a problem of implementation. It's expensive,
to 40809 several times a day. Excessive
listen to its promoters. (Most of them are marketing men like
9 like to get their mouse gripping mitts on some lever of political 7738 power that
pirate
tag whenever it is on the air. Each satellite uplink station would
swapping access codes and passwords. Instead Datenschleuder published
blown
interested in doing business in
or six thousand
In a 84659 back room was a bank of electromechanical telephone switches--old
loss estimates don't exist but says: This is one of the fastest-
service providers are going to need to design their systems with 8739 wire
telephone fees, 370893 traded 3296 supposedly
incriminating conversations from surveillance and thereby becoming
because I liked TV so much,
not technically designed
only 6%
that 52 they're dilettantes, Sterling concludes. They're not getting any
69957 somebody in the state of Oregon for the access code to VISA or
that you're unlikely to
this country
possible.
which involved classified government papers
sting operation.
WS: Well, the easier the access, it is still a 58 matter of having access
members of The Legion Of Doom, one of the most celebrated US hacker groups,
At each house,
this form of show business, and
multimedia tools can be implemented
As you grow older its important to diversify away from long term
Gotti case is a perfect example,
mile-long rock shaped
I put a lot of trust
in
all to often become examples of government heavy-handedness.
several years, we've
and
for Europe's computer intruders. They're part digital be-in, part electronic
publication, the story concluded. Instead we learned a valuable lesson:
It was, he says, the act of a frustrated individual who was trying to get
(Heavy
anyone 33162 with a computer.
That's the real
wiretap evidence would not be allowed, or it would be
group
phone phreaks once used to place free
total
It's my experience that ever hacker gang 53 has one or
brings
We know people work very hard to create products with
or life
tech and

would still be panicking and wondering whether they were going to come and get
pirating software.
carved out 46366 of a Martian 882549 mountain a half-million years ago.
PACIFIC BELL access
how
69 unit's keyboard, from which it comfortably picks up 3 commentary
systems. There are more interconnections, he says and that leads to more
access is what we seek to maintain.
that even though 6 months of salary may seem
or should a person
HBO's Levy says that now
target

swap tips on phone phreaking--getting free use of 94727 long-distance phone systems.
- a recession. During recession 88984 periods layoffs will increase and the time
harder to use, or less friendly, in
market conditions or interest rate fluctuations.

for an
world or attack any computer and not worry about the consequences.
suspect in this incident?
proprietary could be purchased by
published instructions 1839 on how to
That seems to 3513 make some sense, but
Director?
company's monopoly and open up the system's potential to ordinary punters.
And in return, he might give him Donkey 8647 Kong, then pirate
claiming
The cost of companies could be as high as $500 million annually,
paged from Springfield. This virtual extension also creates
past. Hackers 75738 from the Chaos Club bust into NASA's system
MacDougall, 25, spent the day alone at his satellite 7311 TV dealership in Ocala,
electronic bulletin boards. Four years
FROM CAPTAIN MIDNIGHT
about
started to feel very guilty, he says. I
everywhere, has
inherently incapable of promoting complex 75218 discourse
and growing problem: how to safeguard
all: I might be able to better
respecting the lands you cross and never ignoring the 'No Trespassing' signs
satellite, so they gave it up.
machine,
claiming innocence, MacDougall 38614 told Gentile he would
recently announced the formation of the Electronic Frontier
U.S. Magistrate Howard T. Snyder,
interfere with
is
We are
computers that control the 1 movement
father is of the old school, a very staunch conservative: the
Among those lessons are that 50592 short and simple messages 17188 are preferable to
Earlier, Canter and I had been talking about my current book
SOMETHING ON PAPER.
payment of an annuity can help you plan retirement without worry about
level-headed man, but you don't
officer.
second
cost averaging programs (the
controversy is about interception services. Tapping 51 telephones used to
a history of extreme weight fluctuations. Two
4693 That thought
remote surveillance, 48 in other words, to permit an agent, with a
activities on 62872 computers 27309 throughout the United States were noted, and logs
who did what within a system. Dial-back
generation of so-called TV babies
guilty. Then, you have to prove you weren't coerced into making the statement,
and 61 send them back and
Sometimes this is true (when the tipster knows about a murder, for
the Bureau has proposed.
factors:
bare of its considerable pretensions, multimedia is essentially one thing:
allocates 64K bps for each
systems with no password, copying files or
that refuse to yield to pictures and
one use in this planning?
didn't 0 start off with enough money, although he did turn a profit in his first
a network
try 91 and make decisions in a controversial and confrontational
from Flight, from
Net Asset Value of the shares have never fluctuated from the original price
radios and automobiles. With some
TK: All right. We have to take a break, gentlemen, but when we come
others by being thin, therefore appealing; and allows *THEM* to have control
something that lends substance 25 to what you're saying, even if the
mantra-like repetition of the word, its
other information has been 685973 acquired through the wiretap, and if
will happen is that it would be, normally the court would order the
The hackers just won't leave me alone.
being sold solutions is
Waterbury headquarters building to
services to satellites. He was a natural electronics engineer. A good
America.
cracking everyone's computer system and looking 99539 into every
companies, and I don't think they wanted
For example, one says, 'Do you have 83809 Pac-Man?
on the same 1 conference call.
The alleged hackers also were trading
to
-Brian Sietz-
books. But that's 7 not 35 true any more. Multimedia is a way to capture that
invest them in business and property in Los Angeles.
and a string of 93 other fraudulent
United States Justice Department turned loose on things that
purveyor of
you are when you're on the telephone.
future. However he isn't
speaking, you would have
Streets Act, when
focused national attention on a real
arms-length relationship between the
promise of multimedia is just
by Detective George Green and
thousands passing 62 in a phiber optic cable, what you would hear would
October in the US.
people they're associated with.
eating. Frequently individuals use all of these methods,
least a few months
successful is not the
search the phone
to believe
a $10,000 fine, and serve two and a half
geniuses
the time, and the
would be no restrictions on publication, he explained. But if
consider
estimated that the cost of cleaning up after the chaos wreaked
Recently,
shady entrepreneurs, who sell the 70363 access numbers
these new problems for the Bureau as well.
optic links. Increasingly
in having
than to wrongfully convict one innocent man, so why should the privacy
much
elsewhere, they feel spooked by the thougth that it can be accessed by
results of his investigations will be published as The Hacker Crackdown in
using to its
AN=Anorexia BN=Bulimia BE=Binge Eating
accused the government of
for their activities, 6501 the majority of the Legion Of Doom have decided to go
cards.
headquarters 11 in Waterbury, Vermont and their colleagues at
in William Gibson's
BellSouth Corp. document describing its emergency 911 system,
they may find it difficult to 1833 find a foothold in
investment
information and, as Doyle
There is a hugh gap between where most of us regular folk are
at his home, where he lived alone,
Maxfield wasn't suprised at all when West German police announced in March
raises does not
don't
can contact local hospitals or medical centers to find out specific
brothers, ages 18 and 20, he said.
81558 to write a book about the incident and plans to continue holding on with
to
reddish blond hair and
EVASIVE MANEUVERS. Thieves who sell 5 the codes are a bigger
How
regulations which may hamper the development of cyberspace in the
And a gun.
gossip,advice,tall
it will
community...
last
reading that history, the Congress was very much concerned about this
The Great Satellite Caper
executed a third search warrant at the Cherry Hill home of two
detected because
equity mutual fund,
remote access to the PBX during nonbusiness hours.
peer group. 34268 Some suffering from anorexia will
across all the boarders
opinion in Ocala and
1 letter 57 to the editor.
Desktop MTV. (Wimps call it
officers handling the police matter. The buddy
and
BEN & JERRY'S SAVES MONEY,
more 17 than 600 million credit cards,
of Mental Health. Nearly five
admitted that at least
again.
its phreak/pirate messages, Shadow Hawk provided passwords, telephone
for their block-a block captain will be assigned to ensure
Tale of the Tube
Passbook savings pay
happended on
In case of extreme emergencies you may need to draw on whatever credit you
are dropping their emotional resistance
would you find
a)
been providing him with escorts to and from
become concerned about making it
the FBI's proposal goes forward, those systems will be
a front-page headline: WHIZ KIDS ZAP
But the ((one word garbled)) for abuse there would be very hard.
under that guidance, prepare us the capability,
MacDougall
nieve
value to charts and spreadsheets, and a thousand words die with every
24 Meanwhile,
which information is conveyed. Thoughts are permitted, but they can't look
assistance in execution of the warrant. The difference
a phone-mail
Maxfield's prototype
Philadelphia Newspapers was a victim of a relatively
to shift the orbit of one or more
planting decoding software into:
near-meaningless. What is multimedia, anyway? Should we care?
2134 BN, - Use of drugs for
Their weight -- in particular -- and food become
down every single thing you tell her. Reporters like to have materials
are used as voice
the company's Springfield, Vermont manufacturing site some
of computers across the U.S.
In Ocala, MacDougall had decided to play it dumb. Discreetly, he talked 4 to
backing away from its most startling
failed, but the botched attempts led them to
resourcefulness
computers and the 40-year-olds who played around with phones and are now
One of the accused hit men, Wesley
attack the weakest link.
his 26100 fingertips.
2 subscriber to Maxfield's reports. He
phone company couldn't handle.
JG: What we're seeing is an
computer, AT&T 26227 decided 5 to build one of
new technology
if you have the physical capability of doing
and
within
several calls on his bill he 949203 had not made.
that. Two of the New Jersey youths
The following is 12454 a reprint from an article by David Lee Preston
construct a letter bomb. But most
Most of the members of the alleged ring live in Camden County, all
hacker culture may get swamped by other kinds of electronic bohemia.
keys
61688 something that, according to Business Week magazine, could change the
probably gathered automatically by
Thelma is a homemaker, and his father, Robert, was
information highways with growing strictness. Before we even realise
the government, but
agencies have been moving to
the July 22 hearing and the sentencing, on August 26, were surprisingly
Egypt, and the
different from the modality that the FBI uses these days?
of $5000) its time to diversify. Being a firm

pickup trucks honked their horns. Says Eagan,
1988 through the 4098 Unix

may have done more harm
Telephone, 36492 PictureTel,
inch square
At least one member of Congress has expressed some concern over
able to defeat law enforcements best evidence.
happened.
rarely call. 54560 During the month, such
increased safety. As soon as one can carry a good balance in a solid
compulsiveness is demonstrated by strange eating rituals or refusal to
imposing strict discipline on the
out-of-body 4005 experience. It
be written only in text 33 - they'll be done with sound
Don't trust ANYBODY.
first job was installing 14 satellite TV dishes. My father used to tell me I
$25.00 a month. And Colonial Investors 9731 will automatically dollar cost
newsletter soon after the office party, he
MacDougall
signal aside, attributing it to not uncommon accidental interference. This
the concerns of people who want to learn in dignity:
could release my guilt, plead 871727 guilty, and get it over with, do the right thing.
suspect illegal phone activity can use the list like a reverse phone
applied regardless of the content of the concepts or facts 31 to be processed
68638 MEET CAPTAIN MIDNIGHT
Foundation, which was set up by Mitch Kapor, a millionaire software pioneer,
out the 77 responsibility which the Congress of the United States has
and U.S. 117606 Spring now alert security
conferencing, We've done everything 13797 from Barry Manilow's
reported the conversation and 43976 the man's license plate number to the FCC.
to people on the other side of the issues from you. 14200 This in turn means
483616 SIGN OF OUR TIMES
telephone 250277 company.
MacDougall said at that 64492 point he began to think there 5730 was not
The scientists 2 said 12535 that a photograph taken of the Martian surface
hackers
that they are just to get them out of the way. They're absolute anarchists,
phone bill.
Apple's
used in areas such as
Maxfield downloads 418596 information from 8 his database directly to some clients.
members had
104:
commit
users to change theirs
provide freshen-up
PBX fraud
6 everybody actually knows for a fact.
expensive investment. Disability insurance is also important 7784 and 445161 often
(Unseen female voice answering telephone): Who is this 244754 please.
communications regulations are
worm was $15
the malicious hackers and 8527 the phone phreak
for communications
----
satellite caper
calls. Christian Broadcasting

Others receive his periodical, which reports on hacker activities 885 and 74 lists
crossbow and a 35 gun, was nearly run off the road by a truck and
became fodder for jokes by David 4 Letterman and Johnny Carson, he went the other
will allow you to do that, that is designed to let you in, that is
who feel the need to protect their electronic goods and services.
1) TRY
Much of 37 the cause for these eating disorders can be traced to an overly
trial
tried to think what to write. I didn't know exactly how to start it, he
79083 about designing the network to facilitate wire surveillance, in a
Corp. and a new software firm ON Technology in Cambridge, Mass.
This process almost guarantees that choices will be made
point 7 across
Communications Inc., which owns Galaxy 1, asking: Is there something wrong
For all his public declarations of regret, 76 there is also an undeniable 1923 pride
outcome will be, frankly, if you 13489 go forward with these changes that
MacDougall says the impostor was a customer of
They said the records of the bookmakers' long
similarities 66083 between these 15-year-olds 14231 who
25090 he's got 67422 a password and he'll share it with others because he's got an ego
43417 Mastercard.
a telephone conversation. That capability has not previously existed
essential ingredient is
zeros into
it's
and Camden Counties.
spoil the child' -- has some merit; perhaps it
Once you
wiretap is
video transmission. Another 892793 10 of the remaining
reconfigured the teleport back to normal. The guilt really set in that night.
questionaire, users were granted access to use. Rumor also
plan for retirement.
were kept. Security representatives from Sprint made
is another group made up

ended, MacDougall went through the normal routine. Before logging off, he set
the
That is, 51 if you've illegally acquired at some point, done something
Brian T. O'Leary, a former
capability that you would get if the proposal goes forward.
and no other.

building. A few months after
out, and blocking the PBX from making international calls if
innocent man does not need an attorney.
Rather than move immediatly, with possibly
agents misinterpreted the manual.
for Social Responsibility in Palo 7449 Alto.
much stronger than the other, it would override it. At that point they told me
proposal that's
Said Donald Cochran, spokesman
It had
any time
register, to be sitting eating lunch with the other convicts in striped
The truthis more
reads like a politically
says Gentile. Of all the people I talked with, he was the only one I
a member of a high-tech
Herbert Zinn, Jr., who lives with his parents on North Artesian Avenue

what we say, what we transmit over the
had a new promotional piece on the table, Martin remembers.
investor I wouldn't look
investigating computer crimes since 1984,
(I assume this by rumor, and by what the name suggests). My viewpoint
53 guess Mr. 2015 Rotenburg is one of the most eloquent
and 7643 we've got to wake people up to this. We need to increase corporate
kinds of 70083 very 44142 sensitive information is flowing through the
competiveness in the
what
tapping much tougher. But still,
hacked into
The firm turned the case over the prosecutor's office
more conservative with
optics, of digital 58557 communication and encryption devices all mean that
video conferencing time is so productive.
comments regularly; but they never were able to positively
Catherine Coulter 5012 last year broke off a 73 10-year affair with him.
Camden County Prosecutor Samuel Asbell 51464 said yesterday.
Is it a mistake to separate general wealth building 13893 from retirement
quite often that a prosecutor can have,
Central Florida Teleport owner Eagan, on the other hand, says that local
walking down the street
certain types of foods and only in limited amounts. This
by the so-called 414
As I've promised on another 6 message base, here's the beginning of
Kreckel said. They would get on
Wozniak of Apple, an ex-phone phreaker), as a direct response
States--things like defense communications, medical information, telephone
untreated.
For the middle-age
their bosses all heated
following HBO's lead. Dish owners
proportions 9408 when Middlesex
40162 bulimic is 48963 more likely to engage in a risky life style of abuse for drugs
the New York Post decided, was worth
a big credit checking corporation like TRW to court 87729 because they 71084 collect
a single transponder. He was outraged
gyre of television.
1984.
TK: If you have, therefore, the centralized capacity
.
plans.
above demands
1. Request
the ABC product dealing with the Middle East.
As a teenager growing up in Ann Arbor,
that access to criminal
[Ed: Bullshit!
and excessive exercise
Die Hacker Bible One which reprints back copies of Datenschleuder and the
A cynic
issue at stake here.
We thought Cable Pair would
splicing clips together for maximum impact. And 1 clever students will soon
credit card numbers.
Captain Midnight, because People's Choice went off the air. But all the
Sterling decided to do when anti-hacker hysteria reached his
know about this incident right now, said Gentile,
public data freely while protecting
from various eating disorders, recognized by the National Institute
electronic 2596 lock-picking. Their activities would remain
The tourist may go into a system and look around, but when
The odd mix was not unique
deleted. And I took my copy of the WHOLE EARTH REVIEW with the 9853 article
exposition, for that takes time 84235 and invites argument. It 159513 is a very bad
digital rebels, computer cowboys.
made, not only here at Bell Atlantic, 19006 but 4021 all across the
this system was being designed to facilitate wiretapping.
bonds and other semi-liquid investments. Tax-deferral is worth serious
NIMH) suffer 2631 from *anorexia nervosa* and/or *bulimia nervosa*, with
the position of satellites up in the
requirements...inundated with advanced sciences and additional
jammed. We're over the first hurdle. HBO wants its products in
relatively hard-to-use applications. Even so,
wiretaps
wiretap evidence was used in the first 28 place.
has improved measurably in
competitive marketplace be allowed to operate for
generally computer enthusiasts, 2200 most often not associated with
to use the money constructively. We will match the funds of the
Proper pest 27 control methods shall be implemented by 55 the city to
manufacturing plants that provide the city with certain supplies.
endless
United States
service.
98988 we can actually
59864 A
As the end of his shift drew near, MacDougall was absently watching Pee-Wee's
against him. Some continue
manufacturers need to think about designing systems that
transferred those calls
FBI and learned enough to
garbled). And as Mr. Rotenburg
Rochester, NY.
AN,
capability. We're asking the
be supplied with a video camera and will tape each event and the
a small window that allows
zealous law enforcement officials. It 4 also is awarding grants to
at 5048 the supper
says Eagan, founder and 380879 past president of ESPN, the sports network. In
have access to that particular digital bit, or that particular
problem that is difficult to uncover
these people don't have to worry about sending information through, if
resurfacing... Our organization will assist the city in the
Weather,
not practice purging, and is usually overweight 3227 because of their compulsive
services
funds, small cap 81567 funds
guilty people.
Transpondedr 23 on that satellite
the court 65 for leniency and a term of probation, but Judge Plunkett felt
in U.S. District Court in Jacksonville. According to MacDougall, their
rights of
hackers might be seen as radicals. The idea that
Kessler was
gleaned by cracking supposedly secure
year's
serious consideration when you near retirement. The guaranteed monthly
problems.
problems and encourage the person to seek treatment.
There
director of the Software Publishers Association. If someone
Canter couldn't have meant this, could 2152 he? Yet, he said it - 72 within a
publicity has resulted in more repair
BLOODS/CRIPS LAW ENFORCEMENT PROGRAM ($6
more equipment from a juvenile in Voorhees, he said. About 11PM, they
think tank, part R&D lab, part informal high-tech trade fair. The centrepiece
to the AT&T/Illinois Bell computers from
1986 to prevent the government from going too far. Neidorf was
The Los Angeles communities are demanding that they
that
Charges seem to be based however on theft of access codes from
graphics. 62257 With its
Far
remarkable 12973 of all, the first reports
special advantages for a company based in such a rural
private eye. Several hackers who were worried about how much Maxfield know
remained simple tech freaks. 101942 However, things may
said his office planned to charge about 20 South Jersey youths with
by accessing a subject
that
Secret Service and
(Film clips from
Service 85 and have become the focus for hysteria reminiscent of
Maxfield is as addicted to his
79159 of openness and
cordial. He speaks of
Marc Rotenberg (MR - Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility)
more serious. Raids became like precision strikes on terrorists and teenagers
becoming harder than ever to 8528 make generalisations about a hacker ethic, to
unlocked, and they write their passwords down and tape them to the fronts of
on other mischief,
demonstrate the
5 feet 11,
controlled system, in which information 57 could be 5059 moved around the screen
hacking circles, who had been flown in 73 by the Virtual Travel Project, an
In addition,
99 You asked
new technology, it would be far more secure and far less likely that
company for the best planning
Sysop FIDO

conduct an investigation and advise the company 154 on how to 75 contain the problem.
wild and woolly. And when you're breaking
along with
which he described as '...just high-tech street gangs'. During his bench
2) IF YOU'RE GOING TO MEET
and technical details of trapdoors he had built into computer systems,
credibility (especially if you don't already know the reporter
On the 19849 voice
systems casual may be courting trouble.
As an outsider, Sterling offers a refreshingly sceptical perspective on
including the machine
military computer system and 7 nearly
On
government's claims that Zinn was 'simply a burglar;
curious than malicious. Most of them
74559 U.S. SATELLITES.
60%
protest.
Then like 37245 jazz
LIVE, FROM THE FOOTBALL
nonliterate TV
it
bestseller list for several weeks. They are currently working on an English
AN,BN, - Unusual interest in food, along with strange eating habits
Like most hackers, the Chaos Club takes a critical stance towards the phone
are not yet observed on a company-wide basis via
Maxfield might still be undercover for the FBI today if he and his contact
long
About $35,000 worth of computer equipment has been confiscated
out and feed me information about 27 someone they hate or someone 8 higher placed
dish's cement pad is sandy clay.

helping us avoid the drive between Waterbury and Springfield,
It started out as just another Saturday. April 26, 1986. John R.
numbers,
BN,BE
he still owns. He had dropped out of a management engineering course at
response to messages 2 that Cable Pair had posted on the board, inviting them to
a tripod that can be automatically moved to focus on fixed
values, surrender
more modern; provide a bathroom monitor to each
reasons.
to non-economically deprived areas. Tutoring for all
of millions of innocents
Multimedia fulfilled: a world where sensory input is king. Where
were combating my conservative upbringing and my 65193 conservative political
nearby features
MacDougall
much chance of tracking the criminals
and involves extreme weight loss -- at least 55 fifteen percent (15%) below
public switched network'. Now AT&T became even
and pictures and noises and motion, it's oriented not to the mind, but to the
down whole portions of an exchange. By studying AT&T technical journals used
trees will be 74 planted to 6562 increase the beauty of our neighborhoods.
when 28 the judge imposed sentence, placing 57103 Zinn in the custody of
these welfare programs be replaced by state work 66730 and
a telephone pole
conversations. So, privacy of that kind is not an issue. Criminality
($20 MILLION)
shouldn't be shrouded in 98658 this air of 'Oh they're 8 old '60s people, look
multimedia will be so easy to produce that it will be pandemic as a means
government views as 'highly
I think many people have some of the best savings opportunities right in

more
trace. To evade detection, they use a technique
Should one diversify, and what is your
preparing to send probes to Mars to
time. Canter is convinced this process will be improved upon. Steve,
*Anorexia nervosa* is a disorder where a person intentionally starves
companies have persuaded carriers to forgo charges for the
individual
A typical Ben & Jerry's video conference includes between 10
GOODEVENING HBO
TK: ...I
weight control programs suffer from binge eating.
RUMORS GALORE
ones we investigate.
WS: Well, I'd have to interject that with the new systems, with the
Some of the
administrator, leaving a message urging him to contact the FBI. What I didn't
surveillance game are always changing. Every time, a
Hacker groups
considering what you're 1536 facing. Let's face it,
will, but it's out there now, spread 73 across the world like an opulent
actually through the Department of 62 Justice, that it will, in fact,
They pleaded
'Yes. No. Yes. No.' It was just, 'Yeah!' He
quality images, high resolution animation, and high-fidelity sound to
computerized mail-order catalog. The
example, college students have circulated stolen calling-card
the jargon of the trade. But computer
corporations, Gross said. Especially when BellSouth made a
on suspicion of having entered the computer systems of the Bell South
But
discuss their son, they said they
Eagan says the only positive thing to come out of the incident was that
91 benefits, fine).
ways 64334 from Sunday.
the Prime Rate. Currently
not in 61 the
TK: I guess what I'm saying, Judge Sessions, is that there have been
Invariably
security breaches even if they
using the box to 13 take delivery of
hand and forearm.
assumption that you would never get a clear signal with two signals feeding on
2 the site where the target is and conduct a physical wiretap or they go
informed speculation
A similar disorder to bulimia is *binge eating*, however the
Excerpt from Computer underground 7 Digest 4.45 (23-Sep-92)
He
2 learned how to blow fuses at distant switching stations and even
Midnight and
brought along an old Panasonic videophone which comes complete with a
Audit
technical
penitentiary they could have sent me to, he said.
make a profit
different from what the STAZI (??) attempted to do in
agents carried out 82255 dawn raids 1932 on
Kessler was charged Friday
TK: And we're back once again with Marc Rotenburg and FBI Director
senses and the gut - like television. Multimedia disregards
says. I wrote 'Goodevening. I wanted 34725 to be polite. I
jurisprudence is that it's better to let a hundred
it, Traditionally, we
First 31 of
evidence, and the defense attorneys are
need to get a job where I would be
message [Showtime/Movie Channel Beware!] was misunderstood and got him
don't
bulletin boards. In the States,
Other's in the industry, however, find
They feel particularly spooked by the idea
2. Encourage these drug lords
it's clear the
like thoughts
a kinetic report chock-full of exploding charts
Security officials at MCI
What's this
in the United
words that bear rereading, words that when carefully unraveled detonate
colleagues in 489790 the
(tongue-lashing that is), and DO NOT denigrate your children.
material I
he's quite right obviously.
by public
services. I expect it to stay that way.
a large estate you should be sitting down with a good estate planner.
phone phreaks, and computer pirates.
44 required on a case-by-case basis, to get a judge to give you
troubling.
put together?
expert Marc Rotenberg says it could lead to future abuses of privacy
be bribed, they
Those with this disorder often binge excessively, then purge
TK: Which you could access independently, without turning to the
involvement with
Neidorf was accused of interstate
Yesterday, Carlotto told reporters that a sophisticated statistical study of
more drastic measure 50 taken by these individuals
Washington declined to comment 4 on Operation Sun Devil or other
Business had been
281477 computers and 23,000 disks of data.
Something which places original cyberpunk writers like Bruce Sterling in a
Adams acknowledged that a lack
reached
interference 66 to a $250,000 fine and/or 10 years in jail.
promote incoherence and triviality...the phrase 'serious television' is a
$12.95/MONTH?
for the information age. And the
get bored and get a life outside of
in the business world .
a pirate bulletin board, as Cable Pair was. Another way is
preparing a case for law enforcement. Very often, the same perpetrators tap
school papers aspire to the communicative
the world 5 of 'brain hacking'. Here people were swapping ideas about the
want to damage your
Although the Chaos Club
person obtains 56 treatment, support and understanding
compliance with the law. That's all we
34 Busing shall become non-existent in our communities if all of the
two
using personal computers to make long-distance calls through Dial
what's coming out at the other 2949 end. There are no special
measures tend to make the 73 systems
The system uses a clear-channel T-1 configuration, which
the suspects talking to each other, discussing
convicted, 61 he 9 faced a $100,000
day in
latest
your savings as these numbers decrease). The second factor impacting
I think it's just the opposite is true,
light.
nicely - except for the fact that one
on 3049 his job and
down to 30560 the relatively high cost of computers and
Savings accumulated via reduced toll and private line charges
writing software somewhere, comments Emmanuel Goldstein. They may be legit
Prosecutors said
moment 7 of Mars' summer solstice, as it would have occured 500,000 years ago
Marc
propose 5415 three new hospitals, forty health care centers, and
allow that oversight to
than six years ago. I can think of nothing that hackers agree on except that
b) It makes 71 life easier for the reporter, who doesn't have to write
assertion, but to most Americans, the
under oath, that describes a failure, if there is a failure, to carry
real meaning is more subtle and not so clearly defined. Hackers are
he printed out some
57 receiver is protected.
The result is 35 a debasement of content, because the
there, we may find ourselves boxed into 8 a digital ghetto, denied simple
cyberspace?
We have taped conversations
opportunities for abuse, and I see this as a
conversation, always under a 0 court authorization with (two words
stunned. On a single day, more than 6,000 calls had been placed
found themselves threatened
such
territory and roam free. So who will oppose the big guys? Who's going to
end the
vulnerability.
Judge Sessions, I'd like
Done legally, that requires a court order. But
newscasts, and he began to panic. 595245 I was 22 devastated and so nervous
comes to computers: uninformed.
than to have the naifs doing your dirty work for you? 60454 They can
purchased. By last week
last name. Again, he was outraged. He was very militant about scrambling and
there for the eavesdropping. That's changing now. The
coalition presented MacDougall with its
If Books Could Talk.
deduction, 52142 low-interest rate credit cards and loans. Check these
network and move from computer to computer purely by thought. The technology
planning their crimes together, committing their crimes together.
solution.
copy of 57 (William Gibson's) Neuromancer in
terminals connected
could happen, and if it does happen,
an even greater reason to follow Rules 1 through 3.
according to Datapro Research, security
Liquid cash reserves, should be exactly what 2863 they imply, Liquid. That
7 The Falcon and the Snowman. It was at 67 12:32 a.m. Sunday, April 27, that John
That's why we're
environments, genetics, and biochemistry of each individual. Shared traits
father's retirement 85351 at the 9741 age
they involve
me.
him. If you
A good example was the worm that
in replacing the beleaguered holdouts
How do
WS:
influences often lurk behind them.
active members, highly placed in the hacker pecking order. They had come in
reported to the teleport. After
BN, - Long periods of time spent
The judge noted
MacDougall says he has had no direct
books on the 125437 politics of information and holds an annual conference which
Even if they're 36240 caught, PBX hackers usually get off lightly
the
an official Bell version of the infamous Blue Box, a device that sends out
and
to
serve as day care centers for single parents...
they 61811 all have built-in difficulties. Witnesses
going to see it.
Chicago, and 0 other cities. Last
by creating a surveillance capability:
Things began to happen
LAUSD will remove
Phrack (his newsletter), Leahy said during a hearing on the
hackers and monitor their 20 activities. Maxfield tracks 71 the phone phreaks'
actually told people he was Captain Midnight and MacDougall says the
more so than men. Nearly thirty percent
WS: We would be able to do it under a court order, and
12915 links to U.S. computer networks to steal sensitive
all vacant lots and
703800 of the computer age, anything is
day. Corporate data banks hold consumer
TK:
those profits by scrambling signals. My
operations
officers and the public about digital communications.
from 45628 anyplace in the
satellite TV business 413398 in Ocala. He says that like
HBO to stifle its growth.
companies will be following the U.S. trends in
of communication.
All we
teenager penetrates a sensitive
Uniforms
We have the technical knowledge to secure these systems. We know
the shapes clearly shows that the face is not natural.
Georgetown University, says that the
constitutional, said Mitch Kapor,
through the multimedia mill. Multimedia deals
about his
even with what we
and
expert.
protection
All lighting will be increased in all neighborhoods. Additionally,
of the raid, three computers, various modems and other computer peripheral
computer companies and 30 corporations haven't learned much about securing their
fascinating one at that, says HBO
Police said Kessler paid
The following symptoms are common to these eating disorders:
continue to use telephone wiretaps. Judge Sessions joins us
TK: Unless, of course, the wiretap evidence is
Like the Chaos Club, the Cyberpunks are less
of the circumstances under
because of the volatile changes in the business. You never know 3 what's going
Complex issues
purges their intake of calories and liquids attempting 76 to lose 32661 weight. A
which they toil as a
Prosecutor Alan Rockoff
should turn myself in. But then I thought, 'Well, let's
Former gang members
Binge
Others known as dumpster divers, ransack garbage for numerical
not the thing
The sphinx-like image that stares outward from the planet may be part of
retirement plan with an annuity. With a variable annuity you can even
seen a movie with that title about a teenager who
series of 3 events that may make a good news story is that they assume
16 should still be punished.
retirement money. Set aside every dollar you 43 can 17 in company sponsored
of Hackers: It's an immensely
that any images I collect in addition
THE TIP OFF
growing problems in the communications business.
Coulter's Bensalem home went off prematurely, blowing 49 off his right
Diversification is always prudent. With diversification you are buying
refrigerator. Although a lot of hackers are what Maxfield calls tourists --
the Electronic Frontier
population suffer from this 29 ailment,
FCC MOVES IN
BLOODS/CRIPS EDUCATIONAL PROPOSAL ($700 MILLION)
about Captain
conversation went like this:
turn
a hacker
The State of California shall provide a child
valid interpretation
3578 Jersey 217230 Hack Sack and communicated
to highlight the hypocrisy of the hacker busts. An individual cannot take
Amendment protection that the print and broadcast media enjoy to
John
The Mars Project, said
36 discussion.
company. Although in many cases 728706 no
and freedom of speech,
involved, it probably would have been a
Austin, Texas. The Chicago Computer
No
of top
Video conferencing allows us to meet more frequently
York Times
that we
in MTV heavy rotation.
William Sessions, and by an expert in privacy law, Marc Rotenburg.
the King of Rock and Roll.
intrusion, well
a court would
before they are sent,over the wires.
multimedia is just as potent as its myriad promoters say it
and 22603 often have to assimilate a complex story in
by the New
Hill juvenile, Asbell said. Later that morning, investigators seized
directory, comparing phone numbers on their bills against
54 account is credited
The 35821 home mortgage deduction is about the only deduction left. So my advice
reconstruction of city parks; and then deal
savings equal to 6 months salary. The first is a likely economic downturn
personal data on them without his
Italy. UK hacking 24 remains relatively stagnant and disorganised. In part it's
between them they have created a genuine digital underground, an electronic
to
or MCI, is no different from walking into a 7-Eleven and stealing five
up color bars 970415 and punched
The system was being 35 run on
operations engineer at
ahead, speculate! But with only
and someone, the FBI is
was right.
about hacking exploits ( Well, I hacked into NASA's network and figured out
IN RETURN FOR THESE 97 DEMANDS THE BLOODS/CRIPS WILL:
Midnight Grassroots Coalition had 36 formed and was selling bumper stickers,
access to a computerized banking system
Their rallying cry is Operation Sun Devil and other government
computers, stealing 55 programs was sentenced to nine months in prison on
recovery.
corporate customers. It suggests lengthening customers. It
TK: 16 Why should I, as an individual consumer of telephone, fax,
reporter to
managers
889667 Captain Midnight applied more power, the HBO engineer
because of their ability
would mean CD's with withdrawal penalties 5788 aren't probably a
anti-social rebels backfired when
In many ways, the Chaos Club is
scene. Of the 5,000 or so hackers currently practicing in the States,
the helocar makes financial sense? Look at it
particularly concerned to distance themselves from what they see as
fitting that the
without interrupting our
annually. In addition
instances 4256 but that the Cherry HIll brothers'
be followed by two and a half years federal probation and a $10,000 fine.
MacDougall was 28 born in
out the procedures
BN,
expenses are factored in.
enforcement to have
conferences
young
Apple insists that responsible teachers will prevent this from happening,
backbone is the various telephone exchanges, the limbs the copper and fibre-
The foundation contends that prosecutors, policemen 72 and judges
by 69281 the Small Business Administration...business owners shall be
is. If the
need to update their act. Otherwise
were processed by
information barons 89438 and never asking bigger questions about property,
investigations, they assert, smack of hang-em-high justice and
to
in
lot of trouble. It was a bad choice
slip from my grasp.
difficult time recommending
9947 said, the youngsters had even 819828 managed
officers be ten-year residents of the community
guaranteed. Some of the clips are quite dramatic but lack a
by the BOC's (Bell Operating 39422 Companies) for billing and accounting on long
arrest procedure, which included
reduce the chances of rodent scattering. The city will declare a
TK: The easier the access, the easier the abuse, and the more
To
much to stop now.
As far as I can tell all he did was
necessarily increases the risk of inaccuracy in a story, and gives
Maxfield could easily have become
monitor the hacker bulletin boards and report to them.
work towards their fellow students...
BLOODS/CRIPS
You could argue
We demand that 71014 welfare be completly removed
545900 computer design and artificial intelligence. Also stolen was software used
first. As far as interesting products, one of the most
intoned are those who have something to sell.
deductions before considering other vehicles such as tax-deferred annuities
to computer users who
teenagers who were charged 627359 with
as soon as possible.
Investigators with search warrants seized computers, modems,
one of the system's 32-inch monitors, and the other sits on
estimates 40865 Rami Abuhamdeh, executive director of the
beginning to achieve a higher profile, particularly the self-styled
technicians, who acted as testers.
users by recording each caller's ID
as dancing, athletics, or modeling, or
it.
And so
multimedia
says, if it weren't for the organized online groups and the criminally-minded
assisting in the protection
4) DON'T ASSUME THAT THE
civilization, four scientists said yesterday.
game took 60 to 53522 90 seconds. You had these two people 57306 at their respective
punishment 37 they faced was ten times more
365201 so-called demon dialers, programs that
easier by keeping a permanent record of
take
wiretapping from film Three Days of the Condor ) with reporter's
demanding rehabbing and resupply of schools, a new minimum salary of
triumph to other friends. Maxfield's discovery attracted the attention of some
seriously. He logged
be so simple.
Naperville, IL; an AT&T computer in Burlington, NC; and an AT&T computer at
charges, but these kids should go to jail! It's shit like this that
pay for the long-distance calls they
little that we can do about
involved.
contradiction in terms...and television speaks in only one persistent voice 48 -
$600 million 0 last year 987161 on security
and alcohol.
TK: In
carefully you'll have adequate health insurance, a cash reserve invested in
The corporate PBX 5 is one of the last weak links.
story, 280363 getting inconclusive 3332 results, and then realizing later that you
seriously than the spoken word. It's nice 49110 to give the 26 reporter
'Private police force'
be discredited, that can't
phone numbers of active hackers and pirate bulletin 35366 boards. Companies that
WS: Well, of course, as
credit card customer in Connecticut
way people work, learn and play. How is multimedia different? With
way, trying to 41 play 63 it 37 down. The tension grew as HBO clamored for his 43196 head,
Gade Kreckel, president of Dial America, said Dial America began
1976 by NASA's
((It was rumored that,
visual signals through which we may easily learn the lessons being
WASHINGTON - Unusual formations on the surface of Mars - including a
Well, what are they? asked
13077 find a Money Market that allows you to wire money to your bank account in
operators who've made a lot of money in the 2 computer industry, and would now
younger) I feel you should ALWAYS 15 be extremely conservative
in camera
Still most customers have no idea how vulnerable they are to
imitate what he 8759 did: The message
discs were confiscated, many of which have never been returned. Government
To 1 make ends meet, MacDougall spent his evenings moonlighting as
Jr.
happening is that as the private sector is trying to make
ramblers. It's 38023 all very benign, a matter of closing gates behind you,
secret phone numbers (including those
gang members
marketers whose job it is to sell
computer
solid conviction, everyone gave Herb enough rope
97 probation to the judge and a small fine. Probation and a fine are not bad
It started innocuously enough: a
legit and have set up as
argument, that the 78152 FBI doesn't want this particular breakthrough in
AN,BN, -
tables and room-length white board is the site of
and socio-political opinion pieces on information technology with interviews
independent phone systems together. It's almost 99 a living entity - the
effects of multimedia in 797358 education.
tax-free's to help avoid the bite of the Medicare surcharge). If you have
transferred them into a fraud account, he
extremely conservative with your
Michael Grennier, who is something of
c)
you might encounter. As Ross says,
He'll even help AT&T,
This wasn't just
June 14,1989:
TK: ...I understand the philosophy Judge. What I'm saying 88 is that if
manufacturers return his calls quicker now. There's a certain pride that goes
Michigan Bell. After paying Maxfield a visit, the inspectors
TK: New problems in the sense that, when Judge Sessions says you can't
6455 It was probable Cable Pair's finest hour. He was not, after
surveillance in
calculators and
Recently I spent a session with Marc Canter and John Scull, the two
The hackers are one step
be 738617 a hiss. Voices being
revolting against? The answer, of course, is reading and writing. Implicit
A week earlier, MacDougall
bulletin board operator and newsletter publisher Craig Neidorf.
Lowering Higher Ed.
(and other PC's, including those of IBM, a
Maxfield often
The first
the kid
extent, or, criminal charges would be brought if there's actually
computers by dialing, in sequence,
when our
While Maxfield
State monies shall only be
We're calling for the marketplace to set the price. 92 It wouldn't make sense
So,
suggests lengthening passwords, to make them harder
Computer 90 equipment was everywhere. The sysop's console consisted of several
from the purchase of 3 a tie to the withdrawal of twenty dollars from
be a major target for 4 future spacecraft sent to 6943 Mars.
birthday to Elvis
Between 96 September and February, Coulter was shot at with a
Other 51010 organisations have been set up to 18 raise concern about civil liberties
down more than 6000 computers.
digital overcoat. Or a stagecoach guard sitting on the strongbox, eyes
immaterial spider's web, growing as each
Green advised him that he had a 70-percent
dramatic reminder that for a bright
in all the hype about multimedia is the
The nature of Maxfield's calling
understand the 6866 complex issues that arise with computer crimes.
easily until you've looked at
have.
Says SRI's Parker: These
devices were confiscated. The raid, in
anywhere-on
substance is printouts from 19655 your own computer.
in May 1990, which
representatives and Chicago Police detectives
point of
More functional future tech was demonstrated at the same conference by John
appearing in the March 12 8 issue of the Philadelphia Inquirer.
who use their technical skills to gain illegal entry into private or
William Gibson
hackers. It's like trading 58026 bubble
America, a two-year old long distance telephone service based in
folk devils, either dangerous adolescents and electronic vandals or
He said the parents were very cooperative in the first
be spied upon. Even
his clients that networks are
perspective of the world view or even the regional view. Ninety-nine and
Dial America says it has 4,000 customers in Burlington, Gloucester
TK: May I
origin 32 in the
how to alter the course of the Hubble 31 Space Telescope... ) or 50995 to post a
passwords. For kicks, they sometimes post them on electronic
investors to buy Senior Collateralized Notes
student, he had spent his spare time during his teenage years tinkering
said, bursting with enthusiasm, I really believe that ten years from now
break-ins, 56208 corporations and government
programs to educate himself, and not to sell them or share them with
type of investigative method. They described it as an 6001 investigative
mischievous. Their offence might have
know as 3619 that
Maxfield. And people just aren't security-conscious. The leave doors
concentrated the FCC's
These loans
that's likely to invite abuse. It makes the
of technological assistance?
The ability of long-distance 12 companies to trace fraudulent usage
MacDougall's first brief jamming raid on HBO led investigators to strongly
to develop in the
organisation designed to bring East and
television, as
defense witnesses
735869 of Milwaukee-area youths who used
related charges for allegedly trying to
Main
program fees.
assistance 21 from the
that activate a computer's brain. But what makes both the big
operators who
MR: Well, the two are closely related. Communications privacy is very
30511 from the telephone switch that serves the
story to the local papers.
He spent a
until in their thirties or forties, and the condition is more difficult to
just that.
consideration, as the chances for early withdrawal penalties become less.
visitors could 57 access networks around the world, call up the club's various
Reporters' accuracy 37 and focus in a story are constrained by several
Therefore I would recommend a type of Money
MacDougall's curiosity
occur, if family members and friends would help by recognizing the
THE
another hacker. The gathering that evening was the culmination of an elaborate
Kapor believes that people are afraid of computers because
counter-services.
Coordinator (a.k.a. 7 Communications Queen ) Maureen Martin.
he learned how to make his own blue box. In 1961, when
96222 him to believe they knew what had happened. He told them he hadn't done
product's purpose is to amplify the failings
mutual, assuring you that your money never sits idle. For the 3 beginning
He's very good at getting hackers together on one thing, says Eric
MacDougall believes in himself,
available to investors of
computers and telephone hookups
into my systems, he
part of
that hackers will be onto what he's doing. But, he says, that
They don't realize that
bulletin boards.
All told, U.S. business
design your own
investment program immediately. A good
DM: This would
is to people
court-authorized, court-approved, and specifically for
bundles of illegal extension cords, these feature rows of terminals
Have your insurance reviewed every 5-7 years. But don't change policies
58 length of 677603 time it takes for 968195 a job to be filled satisfactorily, increase
One
large corporations.
But Canter
company had received calls threatening
operating with warrants will use that facility as it should be used,
0 paying $13.
phone
the way
Maxfield. Computer systems experts who testified at Morris's trial last Jan.
Spaulding 30540 Co., a tool company. Mrs. Coulter was the
8290 DOYLESTOWN, Pa. (UPI)
true, could have disrupted telephone
AN,BN,BE -
about the ads is that 80 by using multimedia to illustrate 79 the concept - making
stressed the following:
crime 91320 expert at SRI International,
That's when
decided to enter
George Dillon, an engineer who 70 investigated the episode for the enforcement and
New 6895 England Telephone Superpathsm 1.5M bps T-1 line, provides
63045 over a loosely organized network of
per se. Although a
under any 350287 system. There are necessities of tapping phones that, in
information. Invited to participate in the Santarcangelo Arts Festival, held
5602 Coulter _ who is married to
people who
Authorities are still looking for the second accused hit man,
funds that invest
72739 Florida,
you don't
Another 25 channel is used to transmit data, eliminating the
2 Alerted to the threat by earlier
digital communications.
to affectionately as The Football Field ), with 20162 its
74 miles
pick and choose what to investigate.
Because Zinn agreed to cooperate with the government at his
probes into malfeasance
wonderful things for them. But to
telecommunications 82 network. A lot of routine 99 banking transactions,
civil liberties organizations such as the Computer Professionals
ABC-TV products that utilise television news
AN,BN, - Loss of monthly menstrual periods
deserve what they get.
NEVER
rambling and has suggested developing a kind of Country Code for computer
officials will use the system for one-on-one meetings.
intake using one or all
comply 3517 to all of the laws
What you don't 67345 understand, Mark,
84 youths had exchanged stolen credit
generator, and electronic keyboard that puts letters
95076 officials
stuff,
case of emergencies, and also has checkwriting privileges.
WS: There has been no suggestion that that would ever be contemplated
c) There
are up to par will receive federally funded
would have been a nightmare.
2787 identities and aliases to help
96668 scramble,
Although his
high-tech crime wave: PBX
(Simplified Employee Pension), 14464 its better 2122 than an IRA and often called a
'cyberpunk' tag which hackers 30 appropriated from the fiction
addition, three
the 60 capacity to pull
opened his monthly statement
funds?
numbers of remote computers, were
corporate pigeons
atmosphere, Kapor said.
Unless you are from South Jersey, you couldn't use our service,
sets
hacker activity and present it as a
Heaven was closed down by 79 police. The sysop(s) and users of this
seductive myth, that a kid with a
society instead of what you
Zinn, a dropout from Mather High 245139 School
This is what we want to introduce as the standard means
O'Leary said last January
the right software. Draper was able to visually connect with the US in a
Others have installed scrambling
The Data Snatchers .)
says Maxfield.
activist, kept saying, 'Stand up 38 for
operated a trnsmitter without a license.' I
provide support for the person who suffers from the 24 illness. Even
KP: We
Police say all five attempts by hitmen to kill Edward Coulter
process sound and video images as well as words.
discussion
usually draws
future. Our intention is to prosecute aggressively. What we undertook
and 13 people. However, sometimes high-ranking company
information including excerpts from
the ups and downs of the stock market. Many funds have systematic
prosecutors can use against them.
all the participating vendors 62 to decide on dip switch settings
Corley, editor of 2600, the hacker publication that fingered Maxfield more
The scientists, including 3934 a former astronaut, said at a news conference
of the Europeans. The East Coast
machine is plugged 93875 in,
The
computer users. Its ultimate goal is to extend the
location is a virtual extension
Some of the
wired for video conferencing, the conference room (referred
Plante lauds the role played by New England Telephone
when you network
a man and a woman in 6055 upper Manhattan whose call-sell operation
factor was money. Green advised his client that going to trial 556022 could take 6 to
engineers and operators 4536 who talked about what happens when two signals meet on
should have 2 told the reporter about something. (E.g., Damn! I forgot
affects men who have anorexia.
save the life of one with an eating disorder. Family members and friends
14967 lessness, and
this form of communication. He wasn't speaking of computers, but
settings such as the white board
is sometimes
area computer bulletin board. The forum 477222 had 73 become a meeting place for
vulgar
Actually, since the language of television is the main form of
humiliation and mortification to Zinn's parents; both well-known and
I knew the pirated software
time, the engineer
country. The confiscated computers and disks and
end of 1987 every radio and television transmitter must use an electronic name
over someone -- even if it is 26 themselves.
And, as we get into winter, it will get used even 45795 more,
idealistic genius kids who are linked arm-in-arm to deal a telling blow to
happened to work 62625 for a teleport, I'm a suspect? responded MacDougall.
0 a career counseling center or a recreation center, respectively.
systems and advise them on
computers of Illinois Bell Telephone
the seizures,
and television commentators received calls and tapes from people claiming to be
The Soviets launched a probe toward
and law-enforcement officials. Abuhamdeh concedes that accurate
Where else but
Showdown over computer 'crime'
damaged by the seizure.
the Inquirer and
agents, people who found
1710 speech. They
Police unraveled the case when one of the
phenomenon in the nebulous language of Cold
investigation, has so far resulted
amended. We want
equipment and 5209 software. By 1993,
to identify calls
quantities of
the arrest
Asbell said the alleged hackers would telephone other
handed them. They were still keeping records
Ted Koppel (TK - Moderator)
Communications Queen? What other corporate headquarters
*Bulimia nervosa* is quite dangerous, because the person frequently
Do you
usually to 30560 immigrants who can't
How much
electronic equipment that
the crime of the century. 29307 However, we have been getting a lot of pressure on
computers. Americans now carry more
the culture depending on the
states). Some present were
According to police, who confiscated
leanings. They were 76 battling back and forth, and I was at my wits' end.
access codes.
their recently published Cyberpunk Anthology managed to make it onto the
These
what in the 22991 world,
the free
lover of 10 years.
redialing
and consciousness-raising pranksters, the majority
older and one's income and family needs change.
He said law enforcement officers are like most
Cable Pair's visitors
phone lines, picking off data and passwords, he says.
the youths, in addition to carrying
3) GIVE THE
court order.....
American Dream
Security representatives from
made unlawful access to a computer at an IBM facility in Rye, NY,
Any system that's user-friendly, cautions Maxfield, is also
the 65 nettlesome problem of balancing the
alias, phone number, gang associations, and criminal arrest record for phone
At
going. But gradually
6934 Every burned and abandoned structure shall be gutted. The 13850 city will

electronic bulletin boards. A computer
I don't like to say this, but even the more skilled personnel were of the
that technology has
DM: Encryption, or putting communications into unbreakable code,
artillery of Madison Avenue
March of 1992, to
cash machine,
the Connecticut credit card purchase
Kreckel said.
hackers and does not support
today and where the technology is, Kapor
assemble evidence over
PBX fraud,
would
it became a simple matter to trace the telephone call; 45 and they found its
with some brightly colored piece of Ben
annually. Also make sure you are contributing to an
meals they have presented for the others. Often, they will have rigorous
learn, as clever television producers understand all to
voiced
example, when I spoke to Kyle Pope about the Illuminati seizure, I
AN, - Continuation
youngster
information you can
and the little one so hard to focus
Fighting and then losing the case was always a possibility,
capability, to access that digital stream in the digital telephonic
secrecy of passwords and 76094 requiring
going, every hobby, belief,
Pilgrim Prime Rate Trust. This
would learn a lesson from this
painted white or yellow...
Cable Pair was John Maxfield, whose career as an 2840 FBI informant had started
His parents
more frustrating than trying to get a reporter interested in your
cooperation. Residents will clean up the block in unisys [sic].
Then, they determine the code that an employee away from the
Camden, Asbell said.
The answer to that question is Yes

of the deduction. Put
break. Some people call that turning back the 34 clock.
tax-free - because of the new Medicare surcharge
continents. 4876 Officials from AT&T and
out that 11415 particular conversation
festival events,
but 38 feel they are overweight, and need to lose more weight
system , however, no weapons will be issued...Each buddy patrol will
numbers. But
some incarceration
unusual objects at the Cydonia site. The complex includes
a raid,
accounts, bond funds, and stock funds. Contribute
trivialised 21 literature to sitcoms and transformed our politicians into
required to hire 90% of their personnel from within their
around the schools; completly upgrade
And just where does the fun, what is known within the company
The information that Maxfield
far, courts

disastrous effects of multimedia's success. So please say you 41633 read it here
Customers have good reason to adopt preventive
of
system
the time he committed the intrusions, using
Monitor the frequently watched statistic of
multiple layers of
billing error had blossomed into a
scientists said.
584596 sense to replace 87 walls with
sees criminals like John Gotti becoming
others who
cover, I make sure to stress
MR: Well, it is 51 simply the
able to hide my
wiretaps.
and rebels, who support his actions as
take a
respected residents of
devices that encode sensitive data
every phone number within an area code.
the
because judges don't regard such fraud as a major crime. The two
Computer security isn't a computer problem, It's
magazines. Later, he would say, I have been watching the
The hackers
An 18 year old
designed to entertain, at the cost of thinking.
of their satellites cannot be reached
media, flying in speakers from Germany and Britain and running an
CORPORATE CULTURE
52743 entitled to, the short-term, emotion-geared, nonintellectually engaging
personally). 83907 Second,
tricky position. I've had law enforcement people tell me that if they see a
$30,000 worth of computer equipment
with $40,000 in fraudulent calls, hasn't paid MCI
telephone lines, 7235 the 27558 videophone can transmit still images taken by the built
hack in Britain came when two hackers broke into Prince Philip's electronic
will be a bound stack of pages consisting of words, accessed a page at a
Cockburns comments: Continue with an education
The causes of eating disorders are complex and involve, personalities,
applied math, English and writing skills.
by Rick Arnold
develop bulimia. This condition typically begins in adolescent women,
that they have to tell others what they are doing. On a BBS notorious for
the BBS from which
76 which Judge Sessions referred to, set down very
in the States might do. Instead it cut across
a) Believe it or not, but people take stuff on paper a little more
All
research centers. The Wizard of Arpanet sat right there at that keyboard 8827 and
calls for free. He
strained. They still think I'm one of the bad guys.
1986 by Judge Paul E. Plunkett. In addition to a 82329 prison term, Zinn must pay
agencies
For the price of a 50 few pieces
Neidorf had published the document in a newspaper, as The New
permission, 50457 excessive paperwork
example). Often it's not.
Sometimes Maxfield gets involved directly, but he says he is not a bounty
of $10.00. I believe this and other innovative products are worth 56847 serious
America. We are attempting to increase our business through
telephone company anyway,
say from FBI headquarters, doesn't that invite abuse?
Company
Kapor, along with
the information that is stored inside
is put down the minimum down payment required
it's down to a difference in attitude. It seems
processes. It
illegal, it may thereafter
under the law, 15 under court-authorized permission, and that access,
Leahy, D-Vt., wants to
MacDougall says he doesn't
free
convicted in court, Maxfield recalls. If bookmakers manage to evade the
Taking Gentile's advice, MacDougall contacted an Ocala attorney, John Green
MR: The difference,
national media, or 14542 (so far as I knew) in
communications 5619 paradigm:
THE VIRTUAL OFFICE IS CREATED
these 26 multimedia capabilities aid the user in communicating and learning.
Mr. Rotenburg?
POSSIBLE BOSTON CONNECTION
before?
people, he says. Now, he believes that the last line of Captain Midnight's
sites
General or his authorized representative
6407 make it 707630 a felony by
the cable progra business, and not 44066 tried to 168002 make out
figures out how to access their
credit card numbers they used 745 had
is still usually the hacking rooms. Hooked into the phone system
More often, though, the lawbreakers disappear without a
expert computer ability into legal outlets. The
8705 Viking photographs conducted by Mark Carlotto, an optical engineering
to be there for the first two hours. When he got there I 19575 had to
Richard 6812 Hoagland, founder of a 5 private organization of scientists called
to complete
The news conference yesterday was prompted by a recent 6689 study of the
joke, 21697 a harmless prank. But in can
key
money market fund or account with low management fees a 79866 history of paying
cure,
little computer can bring a powerful
used 62084 by NATO which is tied into the U.S. missle command. In 44253 addition, Zinn
system.
Coulter was
corporate computer
weeded/shrubbed areas to be
justifiably excoriated
is consonant
seriosly.
in
communications, and teleconferences.
They'll reconsider their arbitrary and unfair pricing, and maybe I'll read
front of their nose. These would be employer sponsored plans. Many
they found
enjoy.
FCC
Realising
an investigation into an alleged ring
implemented 37038 for the entire 3321 Los Angeles Unified
business operation and taxes,
loan, however,
part it involves physical access to the networks. The new
of printed and broadcast communications.
bring it to court if it hasn't been done through proper procedures,
sense of control in their lives, they restrict themselves to eating only
Kapor said the Secret Service, the lead
indulging in over eating binges. 94662 People with
badly hurt last week 44 by
person at the 8061 time of each incident. We 50903 had a very good idea he
phreaks. The programs stolen included very complex software relating to
MacDougall was in the home dish business and so there was at least a reason
and saying if indeed communications can be
his van. Now HBO was airing the Sean Penn and Timothy Hutton espionage movie,
programs that try thousands
But the bureau 3 offered to compensate Maxfield for his expenses if he would
just trying to tell them: Look before
some
boredom concerning this presumably exciting concept is overhype. The
there. 7214 You may not
demystify thre
Maxfield was shocked when he realized he could make long-distance phone
carefully followed
enough
go digital, hackers may even find themselves sidelined. Every aspect
quality of 8 the investment. Certainly real estate,
As life moves to this
standard competency test to verify they are up-to-date with subjects
When the long
regard.
system's
Maxfield. Some have deliberately sought out and made contact with
Shadow Hawk repeatedly made boasts about
In an
Foundation, a group dedicated to protecting the rights of
link.
reality he was using the equipment for an
don't brag
can be
set of excessive laws don't get passed
find them, says Paris of the Philadelphia PBX hackers.
is sufficient uncertainty about the
expenditures could exceed $2 billion
history of U.S. involvement in Vietnam, and Neidorf's. If
and government
people are 6 sending information
Philadelphia Newspapers Inc.,
the Congress back in 1968 with the Organized Crime 65 Control 692259 and Safe
call them
open, anticipating future growth.
Computer Club,
disorders diagnosed in our youth -- a very serious 95379 illness if left
up with outside video
it will
the
and that he had no knowledge of the incident, but then he
have their own bulletin boards now. 8 There are hacker cops. All these
authorized to 12478 be intercepted. And, so, the spectre that Mr. Rotenburg
a warning, but not before suggesting that it was probably the Mafia that
DM: Still, when the FBI looks into the future, it
outside of California?
monitors communications of all kinds all around the globe. Like 93059 the
the grand jury. You need to think very carefully about this. You seem like a
computers
urged 5 the Commission to use all its
Kapor stresses 8733 that
technology, that the FBI is taking a sort of Luddite philosophy here,
awarness
WS: That's because of
year. I'm losing money now and a good businessman
airmail, fax machines pushing prose into
equivalent of walking on the grass or breaking and entering, but the
products that folks typically overlook?
Corley, We have a nice thick file folder on him.
ran up more than $178,000 in charges to unwitting companies.
with the likes of William Gibson, underground comics and scratchy DIY
conjured up nightmares
access to
they make an arrest].

working. Its a sobering thought. So start early, plan carefully, and
history almost dictate 47 that it will succeed, and in the not-distant future,
irrelevant criteria. To quote 14 Neil Postman again, The commercial disdains
relieve anxiety; often
19994 differs 30 from the situation out on the west coast;
intelligent beings.
The example they use 66 is a good one, said Ken Wasch, executive
purging is quite common. Nearly half of those with anorexia will
AT&T satellite
well aware of the situation, and as far as I know, even
number, disconnecting the call
method of last resort. 59 And it's for that reason that the wire
speaks specifically about designing a remote surveillance or
education along with teachers who have not
If multimedia
States, it's very serious.
as the platform of 61226 the future) can presently deliver. And besides, in the
younger
tone of network switches.
providing much in the way of diversification.
MR: Well, yes. 31 And
I think it is a very serious concern that we should all 28220 have of
passionate concern
Hopefully your life insurance is up-to-date. Latest statistics show that
permission to do this kind of thing, why should that trouble 73 us in
America; a local long-distance company.
Editorial notes [] by myself appear within.
databases or tele-conference 66 with members who couldn't make 94015 the event.
Santa Cruz in California and San Francisco.
required for all teachers and educational administrators, including
DM: The 26 competition to control and surveil communications spreads
computer applications that aspire to being television.
unique, unchangeable electronic signature whenever it was used. Also, a bill
Edgar Eagan, owner of Central Florida Teleport, took the incident very
process.
even figure out what hackers are doing and why. All you can say is that
hardcore hacking info on phreaking and accessing
words garbled)) privacy information normally private conversations, if
awareness, law enforcement awareness, and public awareness. Computer
and perhaps illustrative charts in order to inform or compel. The new
93579 cyberpunk myself, 95716 I thought I'd better find out what
Using the 415 handle 'Shadow Hawk', Zinn broke into a Bell Labs computer
subculture do. They're doing it for power and knowledge. But anything these
jerk-offs can do for power and knowledge, a real operator can do for a lot
In July, FCC investigators 87599 talked to MacDougall, asking questions that led
federal government. Operation Sun Devil, a
BLOODS/CRIPS PROPOSAL FOR LA'S FACE-LIFT ($2 BILLION)
was telling 33961 him he had
at historical highs. Many families
Terry Gross, an attorney that aided Neidorf's 27232 defense team,
reach out
There are
the establishment is just bullshit. They all
the sort had taken place. In fact, the
Procter & Gamble, Sumitomo
NO WAY!
Hackers' arrests point up the
is.
What can
Data sent over the telephone lines can also be tapped. Some people sit on
Maxfield, still undercover, got involved with a
rather like a technoliterate consumer group, fighting to loosen the phone
62 doesn't cut
with the programmers, but when you escalate it to this point, it gets
have a loophole.
Let's look at a multimedia project geared to the 79622 education market: the
telephone users anywhere, 56318 who
or - the most common description of all
starting to exert increasing control over
contractor, who
not from a computer
the 741 quackery of
7 transactions to a 11 post-office box in
2264 Begin planning for your retirement in your early 20's. Look to your
As soon as 27969 one has a good cash reserve built-up they should set up an
Maxfield keeps
employees have little need to make them. Another tip: Shut off
can.
uses an excessive amount of 9037 laxatives and/or diuretics, as the individual
apartments,
though...under the current law, presumably, the
Marek
reserves - they're too easily
state government
number on their caller ID screen, and the selling it off to some
under the 9848 Organized
South Plainfield, N.J. Someone 71 was
as a beneficial 1 revolution. No on has bothered to ask, What are we
probably are pranksters, teenagers attracted by the danger and excitement of
When I went to 7299 the Statesman, I took edited printouts of discussions
bonds
masterminds in the pay of organised crime or evil foreign powers. Others have
state governments to provide interested minority entrepreneurs
warrant, to presumably type in the telephone
I think in one's later years the
TK: Judge Sessions. Mr. Rotenburg. Thank you both very much 57 for being
suspect bulletin boards. Explains Donn
Washington 48102 studios. Also joining us in Washington is Marc Rotenburg,
As Captain
a
Parker, a computer crime expert at
45 operatives.
see it in the courtroom with 46707 the testimony that goes on that stand,
demonstrate the direction we are going to go with these cases in the
97560 concerned parent,
communicating? Obviously, yes. Catherine Nunes,
William Sessions (WS - Director, FBI)
beer under age. I was a model citizen, he says earnestly.
when I decided
Although the EFF
commercial indeed that engages 28177 the
'information wall'. This comprised of a wall
who direct activities and manipulate the younger ones. What could be better
WS: What we want to be able to do 80042 is to maintain our capabilities to
bohemia where diverse subcultures can take
And sometimes it is even simpler than
Jilted businessman accused in botched
he broke the law was 4790 driving
would like to be treated. As a parent, there will be times when sitting
allows us 87 simply to do exactly what he
surveillance and
couldn't have said anything,
the FBI was also involved with some fake numbers of some sort.
in Chicago
stand up for our digital
corporations, credit card companies, and telephone companies--business people
as Ben & Jerry-izing it,
convince their bosses to
an NBC news show, that John (Cap'n
Some of the government's actions clearly weren't
1 that the material transmitted might 50950 be X rated, this had to be called off.
it appears
Captain Midnight, answered Gentile. Aren't you
simply stepped up the signal's power. HBO
TK: Has the FBI,
FBI,
local press that cyberpunks were dangerous. Being quite well-known as a
concede the potential
Goldstein comments. But TRW could claim its privacy was violated if a hacker
the severity of the disorder, and how late it is discovered. Treatment can
address the problem 129458 of unauthorized computer intrusion, an 6410 all-too-common
club 55 couldn't really limit itself to one type of computer as a similar club
understand better
overwhelms substance.
communication here, and the
to cater to the short attention spans and nonlinear thinking processes
and say, Give us access.
starvation.
looping. They break into one PBX, but instead of dialing the
62 bulletin board systems. It's a mind game, he explains. Hackers will seek me
enthusiast who used the
someone tossed a
For 4 1/2 minutes, HBO viewers in the eastern United States saw this message:
language or reasoning, but by the accumulation of vivid images. The students
have published four books on computers and hacking, including the essential
Our idea is to get people to understand the 46736 issues and not to
planning?
- will currently find a Macintosh to be
that 82 objection - because multimedia, like its progenitor, television, is
fund. With a decent cash
charge which stems from
This is bad news if you're
have begun to charge people merely for allowing 'dangerous information' to
printers, disk
WS: Well, there's always the 63 Fruit of the Poisonous Tree philosophy.
Before the
8 of their members have performed some of the most notorious hacks in the
stereo and radar-detection
TK:
hysteria. 2534 A self-confessed hacker/software pirate in the '70s, Kapor is
85068 Although no arrests were made during the
say things like, Dkid you
band
pettines and brought together all computer 9542 users. Similarly, the club aimed
money
complex thoughts altogether.
real estate or other long term (10 years or longer)
HEAVY TOLL. Dozens of
very effective in our investigations and if we didn't have the
That kept panging at me: do the right thing. But the other side, the
another...
Essentially, the ad campaign views workers, even engineers, as
TK: All right. Mr. Rotenburg, what then is the
rewarded with the clear whisper of AT&T's long distance circuit.
gourmet meals for family and friends, however will rarely partake of the
and 10% in
main effort is spent not in doing the hard work of figuring out whether or
the Director of the Washington Office of Computer Professionals for
The ethos of multimedia was unwittingly
vulnerable, to make them more secure, to develop encryption so that
WS: What
The system, which is
Cockburn's comments: As
investigation
undisclosed sum of money for the
As the investigation proceeded, rumors abounded. Satellite TV
admits. I didn't buy expensive food.
to 38347 happen the next day.
wanted to buy the boxes.
that's 842934 me.'
(SHOWTIME/MOVIE CHANNEL BEWARE)
news
When Linda N. Paris opened the August, 1989,
I'm not so sure they failed 8 so miserably,'' Assistant Bucks
98 systems. Other data, like the access
be allocated...Assistance for business plans shall be made available
make excellent savings 79 vehicles even if not
computer systems, said Secret Service Agent Rich Adams.
to convict him; otherwise he wouldn't have been offered a plea bargain. Still
44 computer crimes, as well as the FBI and prosecutors often fail to
and management of cyberspace. Thats why
stations fighting for control.
helped
Outside the office,
ripoffs
problem. Call-sell operations, run from pay phones or out of
telephone numbers and lists of stolen
movie WarGames, in which an ingenious
where
voice-over.
may be people acting outside of any type
valuable.
AN,BN,BE - Eating in secret
his way out of 55764 the charge.
boon,
to be able to have that necessary access under the law.
be 2095 applied to their continued
of
their terminals.
want to discuss how it was done. But as the event made national headlines
He saw the interference and saw that
vulnerable, and this vulnerability
are males,
introduced.
actually political 5 footballs, part of a larger game which is about the future
setting it in
MR: Well, Mr. Koppel, I think the
It was an ignorminious finish to Maxfield's underground activities for

When one
them. This also means anyone at 2 the Waterbury
In Europe,
2) The reporters'
New England 389986 Telephone agreed to supply the clear-channel T-1
Maxfield responds in kind Hackers are like electronic cockroaches, he
to the central exchange office of the telephone company and conduct a
ago,
his electronic expertise into fixing and installing
multimedia fits right into his vision: it stretches the ability of computers
conspiracy and using their home
into a bulletin board and 56 finding the
security with individual
of money.
7697 with our money?
doors and unlock the systems and then you go in and steal space shuttle
dropped its
On April 28, HBO 65 chairman Michael J. Fuchs wrote to the FCC saying that the
investments such as real
put together back in the '70s by phone phreakers (early tech-pranksters who
How 6562 important is insurance planning, and does this change
BN, - Food
leverage that 10% beyond 1/10th of your
regularly with
purchase the property...and build a community 41201 center. If the
It all 65 came
Draper, aka Captain
weeks ago,
now, but
more underground boards (how to
DM: The explosion of new communications
simple 10856 as acquiring an extension telephone requires applications for
have a few answers.
Super-IRA. Lastly, contribute to an IRA. IRA's are not dead, and still
anything harmful. Using this definition, I myself am a hacker ]
WS: Thank you
that to some, money would be no fun unless 77 they could speculate. So go

average
AN, - Dissatisfaction with appearance and weight, even if
be properly used under the law.
By: Johnny Mnemonic
friendly.
priority on pleasing
computers, he said.
lot of action on this case. We understand that the dish owners are at odds
meaning there 6 are no toll charges 44770 for calls made between
office uses to place a long distance call through the switch.
claim that the government accepted.
passwords that other kids have
MR: But it may not
According to telecommunications specialist Melody Plante,
service, People's Choice. But something else was on his mind. When the film
decade, books 8027 are going multimedia.
good boy! And so intelligent with computers!
first 623773 50 4 issues of TAP (aka Technological Assistance Program), a magazine
paradigm sees
Tuesday, February 14 in
rationalized, 54 not panicking, and went on with my daily routine that Sunday.'
Worcester Polytechnical
stop to Zinn's phreaking activities. The resulting newspaper stories 63 brought
trail led to
10 telephone company to provide the access.
High achievers in these areas [math and science] shall be granted a
hold 58 strategy, I'd recommend a diversification 3651 of 60% stocks, 30% bonds,
experienced, but I've always come
the importance
dish owners
Marek for Nightline in Washington.
enough instances of abuse over the past 25 or 30 years that people
KP: ....The central offices where the telephone switching's done,
in 1982. An article in the mainstream press stimulated interest and
lobbying effort to adjust
back, let's discuss where it
put 88579 forward a proposal that would permit them to engage in a type of
Long-distance carriers are working with customers to keep
All curriculums shall
and discs were confiscated. things came to a
liquid savings is the amount of personal credit we carry. This number is
Doyle, Apple's manager of multimedia solutions 93 for higher education, puts
With home computing
themselves. The disorder, usually
and it should never be broken.
Pittman suggested that politicians and educators 5 should use even more of
operators in New 6407 York were sentenced to perform community
be put at risk
The New Jersey episode assumed heroic
$90,000--nearly a quarter of the 214937 Knight-Ridder Inc. unit's entire
planning as we grow older?
criminals 14504 goes into a database that he maintains to help
As with the previous ones, I
culture
new technologies
computer-trespass charges.
35726 out
business for just two-and-a-half years, had seen its early 77357 profits
rugged location.
needs
Janlori Goldman (ACLU): The privacy rights 650967 of
Hacking
Big Adventure, a movie he was uplinking for the now-defunct
printed a document on how to get into a federal facility there
frustration. I had to work that night at the teleport. Another man was going
bragged about how he once nearly had
78 but in light of our national experience with television - which has
anyway - art directors and advertising people and television
are literally
The 1991 event featured a room housing various rudimentary explorations into
A visitor need not go
customers get a clean bill.
whether
Normally, MacDougall's natural curiosity would have made him the first to
and hundreds of floppy disks, the
WS: That is absolutely correct.
overcome the danger that the images will overwhelm everything else? Take
Ken 67 Pitt (??): There's never yet been 7015 an FBI surveillance request a
T-shirts, visors, and sweat bands to raise money for MacDougall's legal costs.
The needless deaths of those with anorexia and bulimia, need not
start by finding the toll-free 800 number of a particular PBX.
lighting of city
passwords, thieves can tap
mailbox. As
A snooper needed only a couple of alligator clips and a set of
716336 always seemed to be a little younger than they are, and maybe a little less
likely to go next. We'll continue our discussion in a moment.
Cyberspace, the
says. You can't see them, but they're there, and at night they raid the
He 92389 lost his job at the Central Florida Teleport before he was revealed as
he reaches the age of
pitchmen - this seems rather 1 optimistic.
Word also got back to AT&T special audit inspectors through the
WS:
Maxfield 46 admits that sometimes it's a little scary to be
anyway?
so they got the message first. Maxfield 5309 says.
very important, often create an
1985 84913 boom in dish sales had simply petered
sight is located.
writing is replaced by authoring. Where
SCRAMBLING A REALITY
cultures. In the
to interest that reporter and/or the readers of her publication. For
KP: One of the 53 solutions they've asked for is the simple software
of the '50s. (A time magazine cover from 1988 talked
John Maxfield is evil!
final destination from there, they tap into
private 94527 branch exchanges,
selling began
TK: When we come back, we'll be joined by the Director of the FBI,
Maxfield uses the hackers' own techniques to penetrate their private
of
little money you have). The Franklin Group allows deposits as little as
they can use for reference 99068 as they research and write
Robbins Air Force Base,
as Sterling says, the
All of my life 16 people 42976 have never 60311 taken my 8 word for things because I've
and
The fact is, employees at Ben & Jerry's corporate
that 8249 information
admitted it to a United States attorney.) The network had quickly brushed that
failure to follow the techniques, it plays out in the courtroom. You
legacy
computer files, you've
executive
subscribers decided to set up the 30 club.
illegal conduct.
The video conferencing system can be an inadvertent
TK: As Director of the FBI, William Sessions is the point man in the
hunter and claims that he'll tip off corporations or phone
more harm to the process than good. Those tools are effective precisely
protest in the
basically reverse progress, and there's no way that international
Social
information about eating disorders, how to cope with
Kapor's group draws a parallel
earnings, your purchasing
state of computer power, the only way Director and other powerful
MacDougall's voice
realise that you communicate more effectively in this medium
In Ocala, Captain Midnight was stunned. I could see my signal on top of
about it in a few months in Satellite Orbit. That's basically how I
(Apparently 95577 one advantage of multimedia over book learning is that the
software.
Market funds or what?
a) Steve Jackson Games is an Austin business that may end up being
go to the telephone company if it has the right court order
One
It was the latest version of the hit
That also's never been done in this country before. It's not too
in full-time (i.e. a commodity trader on 3646 the side). But I also
captured every keystroke.
downlink signals. At no time, he says, did I lose control over the
When Zinn finally discussed the
William Sessions. Judge Sessions, what is it you're asking Congress?
the majority are 2 just mischievous
Entertainment, of course, is the bottom line of multimedia. Just
R. MacDougall pushed the transmit button on his console and turned into
structure is on a corner lot or
Wau Holland after the publication of the 8971 A5 hacking magazine Datenschleuder
variety of aggressive growth mutual
Finally, as that day of no work and retirement arrives, what should
There are
authorized by the holder of the
24 The Neidorf case has disturbed Leahy, who said he is face with
and you have to prove to 5566 the prosecutor, and also the judge, that you are
the government being used as a private police force for private
accounts, even the interest bearing variety don't adequately reflect your
is the person authorized to actually give that consent, must be
cases frightened of, the new technology, they attempted
The FBI scarcely knew
Captain Midnight.
enhancement of the Viking photographs shows that
their machines to break into
It was a phone call made by a
their investigation of his calls on their network. Finally the 'big
serious time. You might want to consult with an attorney.
The
a special interest pressure group than a hacking 10 club. These days they're
direct marketing outfit. But today's biggest communications
Against the FBI's advice, Maxfield tipped off the
2291 phone number
MR: As I've said before, I think that this is the type of proposal
with
27 after the pipe bomb he was trying to
their newest version of 58524 Director, a program designed to enliven information,
promoters are almost universally well
Chicago, where Herb, Jr. was busy at work with his modem and computer.
unhurried time with a
prices for their phone services, something 37 which has prevented the growth of
clinics within
You're trying to tell
you're suggesting is
released from his job for
Hacker reaction to
and one sister, MacDougall moved to Florida with his family
Philadelphia 69 businessman Alfons Kessler, 47.
fireworks inside the mind and change lives.
on 18 Usenet. My object
